Lysine is one of the most abundant residues on protein surfaces. With four methylenes and an epsilon amino group it is a cation of substantial conformational flexibility. Although native lysine is generally excluded from protein-protein interfacesNonenumerous post-translational modificationsNone,Noneproduce a variety of functional groups with altered interaction properties. In particular, lysine methylation to the mono-, di- or trimethylated amine yields hotspots for protein interactions. Prominent examples include the methyllysines of histone tails that insert into aromatic cage motifs of chromatin remodelling enzymes. None,None-NoneIn recent years many other (non-histone) proteins have been shown to contain methylated lysines,None,Nonethough the roles of these modifications remain largely uncharacterized. There is growing interest in the development of small molecule receptors that bind to lysineNone-Noneand its methylated derivatives and analogues. None-NoneSynthetic ligands for methylated lysines have potential applications as inhibitors of protein-protein interactions and can be used as reagents in biochemical assaysNone,Noneand cell biology. NoneIn certain cases it has been shown that lysine receptors bind to the methylated side chain with an affinity that is greater by several orders of magnitude and equilibrium dissociation constants (Kd) of ?10 muM have been reported for peptides containing trimethyllysine. None,None,NoneThe anionicp-sulfonatocalix[4]areneNone(sclx4) and its analoguesNonehave proven to be particularly useful for protein surface recognitionNone,Noneand/or complexation with lysine and methylated lysine. None,NoneA recent study of sclx4interactions with cytochromecprovided some of the first structural evidence of lysine recognition by a small molecule receptor. NoneAnd the structure of a phosphate-tweezers bound to a lysine in the 14-3-3 proteinNonefurther corroborated the use of supramolecular receptors for protein surface recognition. None,NoneDespite the growing literature on ligand binding to methylated lysines,None-Nonethe structural characterization of a synthetic receptor bound to methylated lysine in a protein is completely lacking. To gain structural knowledge of the interaction between a small molecule ligand and a protein bearing post-translationally modified lysines we solved the crystal structure of sclx4in complex with dimethylated lysozyme (lysozyme-KMe2). The complex was further characterized by NMR spectroscopy and molecular dynamics simulations. We identified a surprisingly selective binding of the calixarene at one of six possible dimethyllysine residues. This selectivity was rationalized in terms of the local chemical environments of the dimethyllysines. A second binding site at Arg14 was also found in the crystal structure. Lysozyme is a highly-characterized model protein that is frequently used for ligand binding studies. None-NoneMoreover it is a workhorse for structural studies of lysine methylationNone-Nonewith well-established protocols for dimethylation by reductive alkylation which modifies lysines and the N-terminus. With a high proportion of lysine/arginine side chains and an overall positive electrostatic potential (pI ?10,Fig. 1) lysozyme is suited to binding the anionic sclx4. NoneThe presence of sclx4resulted in the immediate precipitation of lysozyme-KMe2. Precipitation occurred at muM - mM protein concentrations and crystals grew at protein and ligand concentrations as low as 20 and 1 muM, respectively (Fig. S1None) and in the presence of different sulfate- and chloride-containing salts (Fig. S2None). Notably, crystal growth occurred in the absence of precipitants such as PEG or ammonium sulfate. These data suggested a relatively high affinity interaction (Kd?muM). Attempts to characterize the complex in water/buffer were thwarted by precipitation. Thus, NMR spectroscopy was performed on protein samples in water-DMSO mixtures. Apart from small changes, the1H NMR spectrum of lysozyme was largely unaffected by 20% DMSO (Fig. S3None) indicating that the protein was stably-folded under these conditionsNone( greater than 50% DMSO is required to unfold lysozyme). NoneTitrations were performed by the addition of muL volumes of a stock solution of sclx4and complex formation was monitored by collecting 1D1H and 2D1H-13C HSQC spectra (Fig. 2). A single resonance at ?2.92 ppm, assigned to the NepsilonMe protons of Lys116-Me2,Nonedemonstrated a large upfield chemical shift. The nature of this chemical shift perturbation was consistent with ring current effects induced by the phenyl rings of the calixarene cavity and suggests that the dimethylamino group was buried inside sclx4. NoneA plot of the chemical shift changes as a function of the ligand concentration resulted in a shallow curve (data not shown) that was unsuited to an accurateKddetermination. It was not possible to reach saturation as sample precipitation occurred at greater than 10 equivalents of ligand. Similar chemical shift perturbations were observed in 10% DMSO, although precipitation occurred at lower sclx4concentrations. This indicates that DMSO serves to reduce precipitation without impacting the binding selectivity. A small downfield shift for the resonance assigned to Lys1-Me2(?2.32 ppm)Nonewas observed at greater than 3 equivalents of sclx4suggesting that a weaker interaction occurred at this site. However, the downfield shift indicated that encapsulation of the dimethylamino did not occur in this case. It is reasonable to assume that the probability of weak interactions at the N-terminal Lys1-Me2is greater than at the other dimethyllysines due to the relatively higher accessibility of this residue and the presence of two dimethylamines (at the Nepsilonand the Nalphaatoms). Crystals of the sclx4complex with lysozyme-KMe2grew under similar conditions and in the same space group as native lysozymeNonebut with a ?50% smaller unit cell (Table S1None). Two almost identical structures (1.9 and 2.2 A) were refined. The asymmetric units comprised two molecules of lysozyme-KMe2and four molecules of sclx4(Fig. 3A). Similar protein-ligand interactions were observed in each lysozyme-KMe2molecule. In agreement with the NMR data (Fig. 2) the side chain of Lys116-Me2was encapsulated by sclx4. A second ligand was observed to bind Arg14. As noted in previous structures, the calixarene appeared to act like "molecular glue" at protein-protein interfaces in the crystal. None,NoneThe sclx4-dimethyllysine interaction involves one of the methyl groups of Lys116-Me2inserted into the core of the calixarene, which behaves like a four-walled aromatic cage (Fig. 4A). The distance between the methyl carbon (Ceta) and the centroids of the calixarene phenyl rings (3.5-3.9 A) is consistent with cation-pi interactions. None,None,NoneShort range contacts occur between the second methyl group of Lys116-Me2and two of the phenyl rings. Interestingly, this methyl is also in van der Waals contact (3.5 and 3.8 A) with oxygen atoms of two sulfonates, hinting at the possibility of CH...O salt bridges. Water too plays a role in the coordination environment of the dimethyllysine. The tertiary amino nitrogen is 2.7 A from a water molecule, which is neatly positioned between two sulfonates, indicative of water-mediated salt bridge interactions. The energetic contributions to sclx4-dimethyllysine binding are expected to be dominated by cation-pi interactions (rather than salt bridges)Noneand a contribution from the hydrophobic effect is also to be expected considering the water-bearing capacity of the calixarene cavity. None,NoneThese features of the sclx4-dimethyllysine interaction are further interesting in terms of their resemblance to how proteins such as chromodomains bind to methylated lysines in histone tails. An aromatic cage, typically comprising three aromatic side chains, provides a pocket for the methylated lysine side chain, which remains partially solvated (Fig. 4B). None,NoneRemarkably the conformation of Lys116-Me2bound to sclx4was almost identical to the side chain conformation observed in the original structure of dimethylated lysozyme (PDB ; 132L)Noneeven though the crystals were grown from completely different conditions [PEG and low salt at pH 6.0 (Table S1None)versus1.5-2.2 M MgSO4at pH 8.0]. The only difference was a rotation about the Cdelta-Cepsilonbond, which increases the accessibility of the dimethylamino group in the sclx4-bound structure. Substantial differences were observed for the binding of sclx4to lysine and to dimethyllysine. In the case of cytochromec, the lysine side chains were fully encapsulated by the calixarene cavity such that all four methylene groups were in van der Waals contact with one or more of the calixarene phenyl rings. NoneTo accommodate the entire side chain in this fashion the calixarene adopted a pinched cone conformation and the lysine amino group was positioned off-centre bringing it close to two of the sulfonates. In the case of dimethyllysine, one of the methyl groups is positioned in the centre of the calixarene such that the amino nitrogen is equidistant from all four sulfonates. Only the Cetaand Cepsilonatoms make van der Waals contact with the calixarene phenyls while the remainder of the side chain protrudes from the cavity (Fig. 4A). Thus it appears that this complex favours a regular cone conformation of sclx4, which maximises cation-pi bonds with the dimethylamino group. None,NoneSimilar interactions were found previously in complexes of sclx4with tetramethylammonium cations. NoneThese observations help to explain the selectivity for Lys116-Me2, which projects out from the protein surface and has Asn106, Arg112 and Gly117 as neighbours. A hydrogen bond (Lys116 to Asn106) in the native protein is absent in the dimethylated protein where the Lys116-Me2side chain flips into the calixarene cavity and Asn106 hydrogen bonds to two of the sulfonates (Fig. 4A). The steric accessibility of most of the other Lys-Me2side chains is significantly lower, which may preclude sclx4binding. Lys1-Me2forms a cation-pi interaction with Phe3, and salt bridges with Glu7 and the sclx4bound to Arg14; Lys13-Me2is screened by the carboxylates of Asp18 andC-terminal Leu129; Lys33-Me2is flanked by Asn37 and the bulky aromatics Phe34, Phe38 and Trp123, only the amine is accessible and it forms a salt bridge with a sclx4sulfonate; Lys96-Me2is buried and forms weak cation-pi interactions with both Tyr20 and the sclx4bound to Arg14; while Lys97-Me2forms a salt bridge with Asp101. Similar conformations of the lysine side chains are present in the native lysozyme structure. To substantiate these observations the solvent accessible surface area (ASA) was calculated for each lysine in a dataset of 15 high resolution structures of lysozyme. NoneOn average, Lys116 was the most accessible lysine (Fig. 5). While Lys97 has a similar ASA, it may be the differences in the local charge that tips the scales in favour of sclx4binding to Lys116. Considering charged groups within an 8 A radius, Lys97-Me2forms a salt bridge with Asp101 while Lys116-Me2is neighboured by Arg112. The higher positive charge of the latter region will afford a greater attraction for the anionic sclx4. To investigate this hypothesis we performed MD simulations of sclx4binding to Lys-Me2side chains. Duplicate simulations (10 ns duration) were performed on sclx4binding to each of the six Lys-Me2side chains. The goal was to identify the structural features that distinguish Lys116-Me2from the other five potential binding sites. Two main features were considered; (1) the accessibility of the side chain, and (2) the local interactions, including those between the ligand substituents and peripheral residues. Site-specific information was determined from the molecular dynamics trajectories, which were examined primarily in terms of the "binding distance" as a means to quantify the degree of encapsulation of the Lys-Me2in the sclx4cavity. This was defined as the distance from the Lys-Me2Nepsilonatom to the best-fit plane through the methylene bridge carbons of the calixarene. Fig. 6Ashows the evolution of the binding distance at the six sites, during two simulation trials. The trends explicitly illustrate the large differences in the potential for complex formation at the different sites. Lys13-Me2, Lys33-Me2and Lys96-Me2did not form temporally stable complexes with sclx4. In contrast, Lys97-Me2and Lys116-Me2were stably bound for almost the entire trajectory of each simulation consistent with the greater accessibility of these residues (Fig. 5). At a binding distance of 4-5 A the dimethylamino is positioned deep within the calixarene cavity where it forms cation-pi interactions. The complex at Lys1-Me2was similar though it was unbound over ?3 ns of trial 2, suggesting a lower stability interaction. Attempts to discriminate the sites at Lys1-Me2, Lys97-Me2and Lys116-Me2using calculated binding energies were unsuccessful, likely due to the well-documented incompatibility of the MM-PBSA end-state free energy method with highly charged systems. None,NoneFurther analysis was focused on the complexes at Lys97-Me2and Lys116-Me2. Representative snapshots of the complexes at Lys116-Me2(Fig. 6B, see also the MD movie, ESINone) show the potential role for both Arg112, which can form salt bridge interactions with one of the calixarene sulfonates, and Asn105, which can hydrogen bond to the sulfonates. The two residues interact with the calixarene outer rim alternatively, with the Arg112 in binding position 25-40% of the time. These observations were corroborated by the crystal structure. In protein chain B there is a salt bridge between Arg112 and one of the calixarene sulfonates, while in chain A an alternative rotamer is present and Arg112 forms an intramolecular hydrogen bond with the protein backbone. The amide of Asn106 is positioned equidistantly from two sulfonates in the site at chain A, while in chain B only the amide N can form a hydrogen bond with sclx4. Similarly, calixarene binding at Lys97-Me2can involve salt bridge interactions with Arg21 (80-90% of the simulation time) and hydrogen bonds with Asn93 with a lower incidence. However, as noted above Lys97-Me2can also salt bridge with Asp101. The MD data suggests that, once complexed, Lys116-Me2and Lys97-Me2can interact with sclx4in a similar fashion. Selectivity of the calixarene to Lys116-Me2is due to the greater steric accessibility at that site. This is supported by the relative values of ASA averages collected during the solution-phase simulations (data not shown), which were in agreement with the crystallographic data (Fig. 5), although ASA values in solution tend to be larger than in solid state due to the enhanced conformational freedom. While the selectivity of sclx4for Lys116-Me2can be rationalised in terms of steric accessibility, there remains the question of why binding also occurred at Arg14 in the crystal structure (Fig. 3). This question is interesting for two reasons. (1) NMR-derived binding curves for the interaction of sclx4with free amino acids have revealed a ?50-fold greater affinity for Lys-Me2over Arg. NoneThus, it might be expected that sclx4would bind only Lys-Me2side chains in lysozyme-KMe2. However, complex formation at Arg14 (instead of, for example, at Lys13-Me2) reinforces the fact that protein surfaces, with their complex topologies and chemistries, can greatly alter the affinity of ligand binding. (2) In a crystal structure of native lysozyme and sclx4the ligand was bound at Arg128, the most sterically accessible arginine residue. NoneIn lysozyme-KMe2, Arg14, the second most accessible Arg residue was selected by sclx4. Arg128 provides additional longer range (?8 A) interactions to the sulfonates. It can be concluded that the affinities of sclx4for Arg14 and Arg128 are closely matched and the particular complex that prevails in the crystal structure depends on the crystal packing environment where the calixarene mediates protein-protein contacts. None,NoneThe data presented here illustrate how a protein containing dimethyllysine can be non-covalently modified by a small molecule receptor. Using a combination of X-ray crystallography, NMR spectroscopy and MD simulations we have shown how the symmetric and anionic sclx4selectively binds to a single dimethylated lysine on the surface of a globular, folded protein. We note structural and chemical similarities between the complexes of dimethyllysine bound to thesimplecalixarene or to the aromatic cage motif of a chromodomain. This data will likely benefit the design of synthetic receptors for proteins (including histones) that contain methylated lysines. Hen egg white lysozyme (62971 Fluka) was dimethylated by using dimethylamine borane complex and formaldehyde according to published methods. None-NoneElectrospray ionization mass spectrometry data (Waters LCT Premier XE) for lysozyme (14,302.2 Da) and dimethylated lysozyme (14,498.0 Da) indicated complete dimethylation of all six lysines and the N-terminus. 13C-formaldehyde was used to prepare dimethylated samples for13C NMR spectroscopy. Chemically-modified protein was purified by carboxymethyl (GE Healthcare) ion exchange chromatography prior to the crystallization experiments. 1D1H and 2D1H-13C HSQC spectra were acquired on a Bruker AV500 operating at 500 MHz and 25 degrees C. Protein samples of 0.3-10 mM lysozyme-KMe2in 40 mM sodium phosphate, 10% D2O, and 20% DMSO-d6at pD = 7.0 (pH 7.4) were titrated with muL volumes of a 0.65 M stock of sclx4in the same solution. The hanging drop vapour diffusion method was used for crystallization at 20 degrees C. Co-crystals of lysozyme-KMe2and sclx4were grown from similar conditions to those reported for lysozyme. NoneThe drops were prepared by combining 1 muL volumes of protein, sclx4and the reservoir solution (Table S1None). Diffraction data for the lysozyme-KMe2:sclx4single crystals were collected at the ESRF (BM14, MarCCD detector,phiscans of 1 degrees over 180 degrees to a resolution of 1.9 A) and at the Swiss Light Source (X10SA, 10 mum minibeam, Pilatus 6M detector,phiscans of 0.5 degrees over 180 degrees , to a resolution of 2.2 A). Data processing and scaling were performed in MOSFLMNoneand SCALA,Nonerespectively or in xia2 (ref. 54) using XDS,NoneXSCALE and SCALA. See Table S1Nonefor the data collection and refinement statistics. The structures were solved by molecular replacement in PHASER. Refinement and manual rebuilding were performed in REFMAC5 as implemented in CCP4 (ref. 56) and COOT,Nonerespectively. Solvent molecules were placed automatically using ARP/wARPNoneand refinement was continued until no features remained in theFo-Fcdifference maps. MolprobityNonewas used to check the structure quality. Coordinates and structure factors were deposited in the Protein Data Bank with the accession codes ; 4PRU (2.2 A) and ; 4N0J (1.9 A). The protein-ligand and protein-protein interfaces were analysed in COOT. Binding dynamics were followed using classical molecular dynamics over 10 ns intervals, at a temperature of 300 K. To reduce the introduction of bias a structure of native lysozyme (PDB 3RZ4) was used for the initial coordinates. This structure was modified with newly parameterized Lys-Me2residues replacing all six of the lysines. Dimethyllysine was not available in the standard AMBER residue library so the parameters were retrieved from the literature. NonePartial charges were derived from gas phase optimized HF/6-31*G calculations in Gaussian09, and fit in the preparatory program Antechamber using the RESP charge fitting method. The remaining parameters for the nonstandard amino acids were obtained from Antechamber and fit to the AMBER ff10 force field. Parameters for the calixarene were fit to the general AMBER force field for small organic molecules. The ligand structure was minimized in explicit TIP3P water prior to being placed with the protein for simulation. The calculations used explicit TIP3P water and Cl-counter-ions added to charge neutrality. None,NoneDuplicate protein-calixarene complexes were generated for each candidate Lys-Me2site by combining the equilibrated protein and the minimized sclx4structure. The ligand was placed approximately 7-10 A above the Lys-Me2side chain and the complex was allowed to equilibrate. The binding energy at each site was calculated using the MM-PBSA method (implicit solvent). None,NoneDocking was also monitored through calculations of the average binding distance between the dimethylamino group and the plane of the calixarene methylene bridge carbons.