The orphan nuclear receptor NR2E1 (also known as tailless or TLX) is critical for maintaining the undifferentiated characteristics and proliferative potential of neural stem cells (NSCs)None,None,None. NR2E1 is expressed in the vertebrate forebrainNoneand at elevated levels in a number of brain cancers, such as astrocytomas, ependymomas and gliomas suggesting a role in tumorigenesisNone,None,None,None,None,None,None. By analogy to tailless in Drosophila, NR2E1 has generally been viewed as a transcriptional repressor that is able to recruit co-repressors such as histone deacetylase complexesNoneand the histone demethylase LSD1Noneto consensus binding sites in target gene promoters. Prominent examples include thePtentumour suppressor andCdkn1a, which encodes the p21CIP1cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitorNone,None. De-repression ofCdkn1acould in part explain the proliferative impairment of NSCs observed following conditional knockout ofNr2e1/Tlxin the mouse. However, crossing theNr2e1Nonemice into aCdkn1a-/-background does not fully rescue the phenotypeNone. NR2E1 also participates in a feedback loop with the brain specific microRNA, miR-9None. Thus, miR-9 down-regulates NR2E1 via a target sequence in the 3'-UTR, whereas NR2E1 represses the expression of miR-9-1 by binding to consensus site(s) in the adjacent DNA. A broader view of NR2E1 function has emerged from expression profiling of theNr2e1knockout cells, which revealed equivalent numbers of up- and down-regulated genesNone. It was subsequently confirmed that NR2E1 activates theWnt7agene via two consensus binding sites in the promoter, and that Wnt/beta-catenin signalling can partially rescue the defect in NSC proliferation caused by NR2E1 knockdownNone. However, the possibility that NR2E1 regulates additional targets relevant to its function in NSC self-renewal and cancer clearly remains open. The Polycomb group (PcG) protein CBX7 is also implicated in the maintenance of stem cell characteristics and cancer. CBX7 is one of five mammalian orthologues ofDrosophilaPolycomb (Pc) and participates in Polycomb repressive complex 1 (PRC1) along with members of the Posterior sex combs (Psc), Polyhomeotic (Ph) and Sex combs extra (Sce) familiesNone. CBX7 is the predominant Pc orthologue in ES cells and upon differentiation its levels decline and are replaced by CBX4 and CBX8None,None. This down-regulation of CBX7 is in part orchestrated by micro-RNAs from the miR-125 and miR-181 families and by feedback loops with PRC complexesNone,None,None. In contrast to ES cells, human diploid fibroblasts (HDFs) express multiple PRC1 components, including CBX4, CBX6, CBX7 and CBX8None. CBX7 was first identified in a screen for the bypass of replicative senescence, the state of profound cell cycle arrest that occurs when cells reach replicative exhaustion or are exposed to stress caused by oncogene activation or DNA damaging agentsNone. Although traditionally studied in cultured human fibroblasts (HFs), senescence is relevant in several physiological contexts including development, ageing and premalignant lesionsin vivoNone,None,None,None,None. In particular, senescence limits tumour progression and escape from senescence is one of the hallmarks of cancerNone. The role of CBX7 and PRC1 complexes in senescence is largely explained by repression of theCDKN2Atumour suppressor locus, and its primary product, the CDK inhibitor p16INK4aNone. Although this regulation contributes to explain, at least in part, the oncogenic properties of CBX7 in prostate cancer or follicular lymphomasNone,None, the role of CBX7 in cancer is context-dependent as it can behave as a tumor suppressor in lung and pancreatic cancerNone,None. Here, we identify NR2E1 in a screen for regulators of CBX7 expression and show that NR2E1 can downregulate p16INK4avia effects on CBX7. As a consequence, NR2E1 expression inhibits senescence. In addition to maintain p16INK4arepressed, NR2E1 also directly repressed p21CIP1with the downregulation of both CDK inhibitors contributing to the ability of NR2E1 to control senescence. Besides identifying a novel pathway regulating CBX7 expression, our work suggests that modulation of Polycomb function and control of senescence are additional mechanisms by which NR2E1 might regulate NSC self-renewal and cancer. To identify novel factors controlling CBX7 expression, we screened a library of 704 cDNAs encoding known transcription regulators for their ability to regulate a reporter in which a region of the mouseCbx7promoter was cloned upstream of the luciferase gene (Fig. 1a, b). Among the topCbx7activators we identified several members of the E2F-family, the homeobox protein PITX2, and the nuclear receptor NR2E1. Re-testing of candidates with either the mouse Cbx7 promoter (Fig 1c) or an equivalent reporter based on the humanCBX7promoter (Fig. S1a) confirmed these observations. As E2F-family members are already known to regulate the expression of PcG genes, such asEZH2, SUZ12andBMI1None, we chose to focus on NR2E1, an orphan nuclear receptor without any previously known connections to PcG regulationNone. In common with other nuclear receptors, NR2E1 has an amino terminal DNA binding domain and a ligand-binding domain in the carboxy terminal region (Fig. 1d). Whereas wild-type NR2E1 activates the CBX7 promoter, this effect is not seen with a mutated form of NR2E1 (NR2E1Delta40) that lacks 40 residues from the amino-terminal DNA binding domain (Fig. S1b, c). We recently showed that the expression of the five Pc orthologues in mammalian cells is differentially regulatedNone. In agreement with these observations, NR2E1 wt, but not NR2E1Delta40, induced CBX7 in IMR90 primary HFs without affecting the levels of other Pc orthologues (Fig. 1e). A search for NR2E1 consensus binding sites in the humanCBX7locus revealed multiple candidates, including a site in the promoter region used for the screening. To better define this, we performed a DNA pulldown assay (DNA) using 21 probe sets spanning a region of 1 kb upstream the CBX7 TSS (Fig 2a). Probe 4 resulted in a specific pulldown of NR2E1 (Sup Fig S2a). We observed that a consensus NR2E1 binding sequence was present in that probe, and its mutation resulted in abrogation of NR2E1 binding (Fig 2b). However, we did not observe a significant reduction in NR2E1 activation of a mouse CBX7 reporter lacking the equivalent region (Sup Fig S2b). This suggests the presence of alternative NR2E1 binding sites or indirect mechanisms by which NR2E1 regulated CBX7. To confirm that NR2E1 was binding at the CBX7 locus on native chromatin, we performed chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP). Human fibroblasts were infected with a retrovirus encoding a FLAG-tagged version of NR2E1 and FLAG immunoprecipitates were interrogated using two PCR primer sets that sample the 5' and 3' ends of CBX7 (Fig. 2c). Clear enrichment, relative to the IgG control, was observed with the primer set 2 (PS2) from the promoter region but not with the primer set 3 (PS3), which served as a specificity control (Fig. 2d). In addition, we also observed NR2E1 binding to theCDKN1Apromoter (Fig. 2d), consistent with previous reports showing direct repression ofCDKN1Aby NR2E1None. We recently compared the genome-wide binding profiles of several CBX proteins in HFsNone. Strikingly, we found that CBX6, CBX7 and CBX8 co-localize at multiple sites in the genome and, as others have reported,NR2E1was among the potential PRC1 target genesNone,None(Fig. 2d). In common with many other loci, the binding profile atNR2E1has a complicated architecture, with several peaks located upstream, across and downstream of the predicted TSS. To confirm the ChIP-seq data, we prepared a series of PCR primer sets that can discriminate between regions of high and low/no binding in theNR2E1gene and used these for conventional ChIP assays (Fig. 2d). In line with our previous findings, we could show that CBX7 bind at theNR2E1locus (Fig. 2e). The presence of PRC1 proteins at the locus implies that NR2E1 expression could be regulated by CBX7. Consistent with this idea, overexpression of CBX7 resulted in down-regulation of NR2E1 and conversely knockdown of CBX7 up-regulated NR2E1 (Fig. 2f). Taken together, the data imply that NR2E1 and CBX7 expression levels are intimately linked by regulatory feedback mechanisms. To investigate whether NR2E1 has a role in controlling senescence, we first expressed NR2E1 in late passage IMR90 cells. Upon NR2E1 expression we observed up-regulation of CBX7 accompanied by down-regulation of p16INK4a(Fig. 3a); a more pronounced effect was observed at the RNA level (Fig. 3b). Importantly, the expression of NR2E1 also reduced the levels of p21CIP1protein and RNA (Fig 3a, b) as previously reported that NR2E1 can do in other contextsNone, and in agreement with our data showing binding of NR2E1 to theCDKN1Apromoter (Fig 2b). IMR90 cells were then passaged until the empty vector controls reached senescence. NR2E1 expression resulted in an appreciable extension of replicative lifespan, as judged by cumulative population doublings and colony formation assays (Fig 3c and 3d). Consistent with NR2E1 counteracting senescence, a higher percentage of the NR2E1-expressing cells incorporated BrdU (Fig 3e) and a smaller percentage stained positively for SA-beta-Gal activity, or showed evidence of senescence-associated heterochromatin foci (SAHFs) (Fig 3f and 3g). The effects of NR2E1 on senescence were dependent on DNA binding and were not observed with the NR2E1Delta40 mutant (Fig S3a-c). In addition NR2E1 expression also affected replicative senescence in a different strain of fibroblasts, WI-38 (Fig S3d). Next we investigated a possible role of NR2E1 in oncogene-induced senescence (OIS). To this end, we overexpressed NR2E1 wt or a mutant version in IMR90 ER:RAS cells, a model of OIS. IMR90 ER:RAS express a chimeric protein that upon 4-hydroxy-tamoxifen (4OHT) addition becomes activated, triggering senescenceNone. The expression of NR2E1 partially prevented the growth arrest and senescence observed upon RAS induction (Fig 4a, b). Expression of NR2E1 also blunted the induction of p16INK4aand p21CIP1during OIS (Fig 4c). All together the above results suggest that one of NR2E1 functions is to suppress senescence. To extend these observations, we investigated whether depletion of NR2E1 would be sufficient to induce premature senescence. To this end, we used recombinant retroviruses to deliver short hairpin RNAs (shRNAs) that target NR2E1 (Fig. S4a). IMR90 infection with shNR2E1.2, which was capable of reducing NR2E1 expression by over 90%, led to decreased cell proliferation and premature senescence (Fig. 5a, bandS3b). These observations were confirmed using shNR2E1.3, another shRNA targeting NR2E1 (Fig. S4b). Similar results were obtained following transfection of IMR90 cells with an NR2E1-specific siRNA. Although the knock-down was less efficient, there was a significant decrease in the proportion of BrdU-positive cells (Fig. 5c). As anticipated, NR2E1 knockdown resulted in down-regulation of CBX7 levels and upregulation of p16INK4aand p21CIP1(Fig. 5d). Further extending the generality and significance of our results, knockdown of NR2E1 in primary human prostate epithelial cells also causes a senescence-like response accompanied by upregulation of p16INK4aand p21CIP1(Fig. S4c, d). To investigate the contributions of NR2E1 regulation of p16INK4aand p21CIP1to senescence, we used previously validated shRNAsNoneto knock down the expression of these genes (Fig. S4e) and asked what effects they had on the premature senescence caused by depletion of NR2E1. In accordance with our previous data, the proliferation block was partially dependent on both p16INK4aand p21CIP1(Fig. 5e). NR2E1 has been primarily implicated in the regulation and function of neural stem cells (NSC) and initiation of brain tumoursNone. We therefore sought to investigate whether the mechanisms that we have uncovered in primary fibroblasts also operates in neural cells. We used two different siRNAs to knock down Nr2e1 expression in postnatal mouse neural stem cells (NSCs) (Fig. S5a). Although the knockdown was partial, both siRNAs resulted in reduced expression ofCbx7and the upregulation of bothInk4aandCdkn1a(Fig. 6a). The cells also underwent a senescence-like arrest as judged by increased numbers of SA-beta-Gal positive cells (Fig. 6b, c). Similar results were obtained using lentiviral vectors to express different shRNAs targeting mouseNr2e1(Fig. S5a, b), suggesting that NR2E1 can also regulate CBX7 and senescence in NSCs. Finally, we took advantage of a collection of samples from glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) patients and asked whether there was a link between the expression levels ofNR2E1andCBX7, as judged by qRT-PCR. Interestingly, we observed a direct correlation, suggesting that enhanced levels ofNR2E1associated with GBM formation result in a concomitant increase inCBX7expression (Fig. 6d). The above results suggest that control of CBX7 and senescence could contribute to explain the role of NR2E1 in NSC self-renewal and its role in gliomagenesis. There has been a great deal of interest in the mechanisms by which PRC complexes regulate gene expression and how they are recruited to target loci, but relatively little is known about the transcriptional regulation of the PcG genes themselves. In particular CBX7 is a PcG important to control senescenceNone, stem cell self-renewalNoneand cancerNone,None,None,None. Recently others and we described that CBX7 expression is subjected to repression by PRCs and is controlled by miR-125 and miR-181None,None, but no much else is known about its regulation. Here, we identify the orphan nuclear receptor NR2E1 as a novel regulator of CBX7 expression. There are intriguing parallels between CBX7 and NR2E1 as both are implicated in the maintenance of stem-cell characteristics and both were historically viewed as transcriptional repressors. However, there is increasing evidence that they can have both positive and negative influences on gene expression, albeit in different ways. NR2E1 is a DNA binding transcription factor that recruits histone modifying enzymes to regulate transcription of target genes whereas CBX7 operates within a multicomponent complex that associates with and modifies histone tails, rather than interacting directly with DNA. Whereas NR2E1 operates predominantly in neural lineages, CBX7 is more widely expressed. The role of CBX7 in the regulation ofINK4ahas been well documented in human fibroblasts, the classical model for cellular senescenceNone. Although the endogenous levels of NR2E1 in HFs are low, ectopically expressed NR2E1 associates with the CBX7 locus and activates its expression. Conversely, CBX7 binds to the NR2E1 locus as a component of PRC1 complexes, and repressed it as part of a regulatory feedback loop. Our work shows how high levels of NR2E1 restrain senescence by keeping p16INK4aand p21CIP1expression downregulated. Therefore, besides regulating p16INK4a, NR2E1 also impacts on p21/p53 as suggested from previous work showing that p21CIP1is a direct NR2E1 targetNone, confirmed by us in the context of senescence. In addition, the engagement of p16INK4apotentially explains why p21CIP1knockout does not fully rescue the proliferation ofNr2e1NonecellsNone. As most of the previous literature on NR2E1 relates to its role in neural cells and brain-derived tumoursNone, we investigated whether the regulation of CBX7 and senescence by NR2E1 that we have uncovered here also operates in these systems. Analysis of the gene expression data from human gliomas provided tentative evidence for a correlation between NR2E1 and CBX7. This is interesting, as a previous work has suggested that Cbx7 behave as a tumor suppressor in gliomasNone. However, in that study the effect of Cbx7 was analysed onCdkn2aNonemice, which don't express p16Ink4aor p19Arf, key effectors of senescence. More importantly, knockdown of Nr2e1 in NSCs recapitulated our observations in HFs, suggesting that the ability of NR2E1 to prevent senescence is relevant for its role in self-renewal of NSCs as well as in cancer. Preliminary results with NSCs derived fromCdkn2aNonemice, suggest that similar to that observed in HFs, theInk4a/Arflocus contributes to mediate senescence caused by NR2E1 loss (data not shown). In summary, we show that NR2E1 regulates CBX7 expression. As well as adding to our understanding of the transcriptional control of PcG genes, the data suggest that CBX7 can mediate some of the effects of NR2E1 in NSC and cancer. By controlling senescence via CBX7-dependent and independent mechanisms, NR2E1 adds additional functions to its already long repertoire that could explain its function in controlling NSC self-renewal and its role in gliomagenesis. HEK293T, IMR90 and WI-38 cells were obtained from the ATCC. Leiden cells were described previouslyNone. Cells were maintained in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (Invitrogen) with 10% fetal bovine serum (PAA) and 1% antibiotic-antimycotic solution (Invitrogen). Primary human prostate epithelial cells (HPrEC) were obtained from Lonza and maintained in prostate epithelial cell growth medium (PrEGM, Lonza). Methods used for retrovirus production and infection have been previously describedNone. For isolation of NSCs, the SVZ was dissected from P6-P10 mouse brains as described previouslyNone. Briefly, following isolation, the SVZ was dissociated in HBSS medium (Invitrogen) containing 0.05% trypsin (Invitrogen) and 60U/ml Dnase I (Sigma), washed and plated on poly-l-lysine (PLL)-coated plates in SVZ explant medium [DMEM/F12 (Invitrogen), 3%FBS, 20ng/ml EGF (Peprotech)]. The next day NSCs were purified by fractionation and the medium was replaced with SVZ culture medium [DMEM/F12 (Invitrogen), 0.25% FBS (invitrogen), N2 (Invitrogen), 20ng/ml EGF (Peprotech), 10ng/ml bFGF (Peprotech) and 35 mug/ml bovine pituitary extract] modified fromNone. NSC were grown to confluency and subcultured in adhesion under the same conditions for up to 8-10 passages. All experiments were performed on freshly isolated NSCs. The Transcription Factor library was obtained from Origene. The library contains 704 full-length human cDNAs cloned in the pCMV6-XL5 vector. NR2E1 was cloned into pMIV retroviral vector. NR2E1 Delta40 mutant and FLAG-NR2E1 were generated by PCR. Human and mouse CBX7 promoters were cloned into a pGL3-basic luciferase reporter vector by PCR using a BAC or FOSMID plasmid as template. Plasmids expressing CBX7 have been described previouslyNone. For the luciferase screen, reverse transfection using Polyethylenimine (PEI) (Polysciences, 23966) was performed in HEK293T cells to individually transfect 704 clones from the transcription factor library in a 96-well plate format. A 20:1 ratio of promoterLuciferasereporter toRenillaconstruct was used. pGL3-basic was used as control vector. FireflyandRenillaluciferase activities were evaluated using the Dual-Luciferase Reporter Assay system (Promega) 48 h after transfection. Each luciferase value was expressed as the number of median-adjusted standard deviation (z-score value) and a threshold was established to Z-score value less than -2. BrdU labelling and crystal violet staining were performed as previously describedNone. IMR90 fibroblasts or NSC were seeded in 6-well plates. Two days later, the cells were fixed with 0.5% glutaraldehyde (w/v) for 15 min and then washed twice with 1 mM MgCl2in PBS (pH 6.0). X-Gal staining solution (1 mg mL-1X-Gal, 5 mM K3[Fe(CN)6] and 5 mM K4[Fe(CN)6] in 1 mM MgCl2/PBS (pH 6.0)) was added to the cells for 2-24 h, after which the cells were washed with water and stored at 4 degrees C, in the dark. The cell nuclei were stained with 4',6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) for 30 min. Bright field and DAPI images were taken and the percentage of SA-beta-Gal-positive cells was determined upon counting at least 100 cells per condition. Immunofluorescence (IF) was performed using an automated high throughput microscope (InCell Analyzer 2000, GE). Image processing and quantification were performed using InCell Investigator software (GE). Immunoblot (IB) was performed following standard procedures. Primary antibodies used in this study are summarized inSup Table 1. Total RNA was extracted using miRCURY RNA isolation kit (Exiqon). cDNAs were generated using SuperScript II reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen). PCR reactions were performed in a Real-Time PCR Detection System (BioRad) using Power SYBR Green Master Mix or TaqMan Universal PCR Master Mix (Applied Biosystems). Expression was normalized to ribosomal protein S14 (RPS14) or TATA box binding protein (TBP) expression. Primers and Taqman probes used are listed inSup Table 2. IMR90 cells, HPrEC and NSC were transfected with 20-30 nM siRNA (Qiagen), miR or anti-miR (Ambion) in 96-well or 6-well plates. A 3.5% solution of HiPerFect transfection reagent (QIAGEN) was prepared in serum-free medium and then mixed with the siRNA. The mix was incubated for 30 min at room temperature and then added to the cells. The cell culture medium was replaced the following day and cells were either fixed for immunofluorescence (IF) or harvested for RNA extraction 48-120 h later. The CyTM 3-labelled siGLOTM cyclophilin B siRNA (Dharmacon) was used to monitor transfection efficiency. Sequences specifying shRNAs against human NR2E1 were cloned in pRetroSuper as previously describedNone. Lentiviral pLKO-based shRNA targeting mouse NR2E1 (pLKO-shNR2E1.4 and pLKO-shNR2E1.4) were obtained from Sigma (TRCN0000026019 and TRCN0000026030). The sequences of siRNA and shRNAs used are listed inSup Table 3. Knockdown of p16INK4a, and CBX7 was achieved using validated shRNA constructsNone,None. ChIP experiment were performed as described previouslyNone. Immunoprecipitation of crosslinked chromatin was conducted with antibodies listed above. After immunoprecipitation, DNA was extracted using the QIAquick PCR purification kit (Qiagen) and an aliquot amplified by real time qPCR using primers described inSup Table 4. To confirm target enrichment each PCR product was evaluated first by standard end point PCR. Parallel ChIP were performed using approximately 5 mug of antibody with 500 mug chromatin. The recovered material was pooled and concentrated to a minimum of 0.2 mug/mul. Input DNA was used as control for the ChIP-seq analysis. Library preparation and Solexa genome-wide sequencing were performed as recommended by the manufacturer. The alignments were performed using novoalign (version 2.07.14;http://novocraft.com) allowing for a single mismatch per read. Duplicates were removed using the Picard MarkDuplicates program (picard-tools package version 1.48;http://picard.sourceforge.net) and peak calling was performed using MACS (version 1.4.0rc2;None). Lysates from HEK293T cells overexpressing wild type or mutant NR2E1 were prepared in HKMG buffer (10 mM Hepes pH 7.9, 100 mM KCl, 5mM MgCl2, 10% glycerol, 0.5% NP40, 1mM DTT and protease inhibitors (Complete EDTA-free, Roche) and pre-cleared with pre-equilibrated streptavidin-coupled Dynabeads (Invitrogen). Pairs of complementary oligonucleotides (44 bp-long, with the sense oligonucleotide biotinylated at the 5' end, Sigma, sequences described inSup Table 5) were annealed and incubated overnight at 4 degrees C with the cell lysates. DNA-bound proteins were collected by incubation for 1h at 4 degrees C with streptavidin-coupled Dynabeads (Invitrogen), washed four times in HKMG buffer and separated by SDS-PAGE. NR2E1 was detected by IB. Samples from 28 patients with newly diagnosed, untreated, histologically proven GBM (glioblastoma multiforme) according to the World Health Organization classification, were used. Samples were collected at the Clinica Universidad de Navarra (CUN; Pamplona, Spain). The study protocol was approved by the Institutional Review Board, and all the participants signed the informed consent form approved by the respective Institutional Review Boards or Ethical Committees. NR2E1 and CBX7 transcript levels were measured by RT-PCR using an ABI 7700 sequence detection system (Applied Biosystems). The expression levels relative to GAPDH were calculated and normalized relative to expression in normal brain RNA.