Many mitral valve pathologies, including ischemic mitral regurgitation, are characterized by thickened valve leaflets, myofibroblastic-like interstitial cells, disrupted extracellular matrix (ECM)[1,2], and in some, evidence for endothelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EndMT)[3]. The cellular mechanisms that normally prevent these alterations are not well-understood. Here we set out to examine how mitral valve endothelial cells (VEC) and interstitial cells (VIC) might interact with each other to maintain quiescent VEC and VIC phenotypes that are observed in healthy valves [4,5]. The mitral valve endothelium is continuous and uniformly positive for the endothelial markers CD31 [3] and von Willebrand Factor [6]. The integrity of the endothelium is thought to be critical for durability and function of the mitral valve over a lifetime [7]. Emerging evidence suggests that subsets of VEC are progenitor cells that appear and function as endothelium but can be stimulated to undergo EndMT, and further to express markers of osteogenic and chondrogenic mesenchymal cells [8,9]. The onset and function of EndMT in adult valves is not well understood. We speculated in previous work that low levels of EndMT may serve to replenish the VIC population over a lifetime [10,11]. More recently, we found increased EndMT in ovine mitral valve leaflets exposed to mechanical tethering in a model designed to mimic the mechanical stretch imposed on the mitral valve after myocardial infarction [3]. This finding implicated EndMT as an adaptive mechanism that may contribute to increased mitral leaflet thickness and area in this ovine model [3]. These studies point to a dynamic role for the endothelium in mitral valve homeostasis and adaptation. As primary biosynthetic producers of the ECM, the mitral VIC play a critical role in maintaining the structural integrity of the leaflets, which must form an effective seal in systole to prevent mitral regurgitation. VIC resemble fibroblasts but exhibit considerable heterogeneity that is not yet defined by specific markers. Three types of VICs have been proposed: quiescent VIC, activated VIC and progenitor-like VIC [5]. Quiescent VIC produce basal levels of ECM tailored to the specific layer in which the VIC resides - the atrialis, spongiosa or fibrosa [12]. Chondromodulin1 (Chm1), a 25kDa secreted glycoprotein, is prominently expressed in avascular regions of cardiac valves wherein it prevents angiogenesis [13]. Excessive angiogenesis is often correlated with disrupted heart valve function and disease. Thus, Chm1 serves as a marker of healthy valves. In contrast, alpha-SMA-positive VIC are increased in diseased valves [14,15]. In culture, mitral VEC form cobblestone monolayers, express CD31, vascular endothelial (VE)-cadherin [9] and von Willebrand Factor [6]. Flanagan and colleagues showed that porcine mitral VEC express ECM components but unlike VIC, do not express type I collagen [6]. As observed with VEC from pulmonary and aortic valves [9-11,16,17], mitral VEC undergo EndMT when treated with TGFbeta [9]. Taken together, the ability of VEC to undergo EndMT in response to mechanical stimuli [3,18], inflammatory cytokines [19] as well as TGFbeta, points to a dynamic endothelium overlying the VIC. In culture, VIC adopt an activated phenotype, characterized primarily by alpha-SMA expression in 30-100% of the cells, a finding which has been attributed to the rigidity of the plastic substratum [20,21]. Activated VIC also display contractile activity [22] indicative of the myofibroblastic phenotype. In vitro,mitralVIC have been shown to express alpha-SMA, vimentin [23], type I collagen [6] and Chm1 [24]. VICs can be induced to an activated phenotype by a variety of mechanisms, including chemical stimuli [12] [25-29], substrate stiffness [20,30], and mechanical stimulation (shear stress or stretching) [22,31-33]. We hypothesize that normal valve cellular and ECM integrity is actively maintained in homeostatic balance by paracrine interactions between VIC and VEC that inhibit EndMT and suppress VIC activation. Previous observations show that VEC communicate effectively with one another via surface receptors and can influence one another's phenotypes [34,35]. There are also studies that show VEC-generated nitric oxide reduces calcification and activation of aortic VIC [36-38]. To address our hypothesis, we used an in vitro indirect co-culture assay to determine if mitral VEC and VIC can modulate one another under defined conditions but in the absence of additional stimuli such as mechanical forces. Used were Endothelial Basal Medium (EBM)-2 (CC-3156, Lonza, Hopkinton, MA); fetal bovine serum (FBS) (Hyclone, Logan, UT); Glutamine-penicillin-streptomycin sulfate (GPS) DNase I, Amplification Grade and Cell Titer96 Aqueous One Solution Cell Proliferation Assay (Life Technologies (formerly Invitrogen), Carlsbad, California); tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha), human TGFbeta-1 (100-B-001) (R D Systems, Minneapolis, MN), basic fibroblast growth factor (11123149001) (Roche Diagnostics, Indianapolis, IN), fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) anti-goat IgG (FI-5000), Texas Red anti-mouse immunoglobulin G (IgG) (TI-2000), peroxidase conjugated anti-mouse IgG (PI-2000), peroxidase conjugated anti-goat IgG (PI-9500) (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA), FITC-conjugated anti-human CD31 (SC-1506) (Ancell, Bayport, MN), mouse anti-human alpha-SMA (A-2547, Sigma Aldrich Co., St. Louis, MO), goat anti-human CD31 (SC-1506), goat anti-human vascular endothelial-Cadherin (VE-Cadherin) (SC-6458) (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA), mouse anti-bovine endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) (clone 9D10, 33-4600, Life Technologies), rabbit antihuman von Willebrand Factor (vWF) (A-0082), rabbit polyclonal anti-vimentin antibody (Ab-45939), smooth muscle myosin heavy chain alpha (SM22alpha) (Ab-10135) (Abcam, Cambridge, MA), FITC-streptavidin (SA-5001) and Texas Red-streptavidin (SA-5006) (Amersham Life Sciences, Arlington Heights, IL), RNeasy kit and RNase-free DNase (Qiagen, Valencia, CA), Collagenase A (Roche Diagnostics, Indianapolis, IN), Type I collagen (Cohesion Technologies Inc., Palo Alto, CA and BD Biosciences, Bedford MA), phenol red-free Matrigel (BD Biosciences, Bedford, MA). Immobilon-P membrane (Millipore, Bedford, MA), Hyperfilm ECL, 24mm Transwells with 0.4um pore polycarbonate membrane inserts, 12mm Transwells with 0.4um pore polycarbonate membrane inserts, (Corning Life Sciences, Acton, MA). Ovine mitral valves and carotid arteries were obtained from animals weighing 20 to 25 kg and 8 to 10 months of age under approved guidelines for animal experimentation. Valve leaflets were incubated in EBM-2 media with 5% FBS, 1% GPS, 2 mmol/L L-glutamine, and 100 ug/ml gentamicin sulfate for 1 to 4 hours, minced into 2 mm2pieces, incubated with 0.2% collagenase A in EBM-2 media for 5 minutes at 37 degrees C, and diluted with Hanks' balanced salt solution containing 5% FBS, 1.26 mmol/L CaCl2, 0.8 mmol/L MgSO4, and 1% GPS (wash buffer). The supernatant from the digest was sedimented at 200 *g, resuspended in EBM-B media (EBM-2 media, 10% heat-inactivated FBS, 1% GPS, and 2 ng/mL basic fibroblast growth factor) and plated. The following day, primary cultures were washed to remove unattached cells and given fresh EBM-B. To prepare clonal populations, primary cultures were expanded for approximately 7 days, trypsinized, resuspended in EBM-B at 3.3 cells/ml, and 100 ul was plated in each well of a 96-well plate; visual inspection was performed to verify that single colonies appeared in a subset of wells. When the colonies covered two-thirds of the well, cells were split into 24-well dishes. The mitral VEC clones were characterized as previously described [9] and designated mitral VEC-4, VEC-5, VEC-E10. Interstitial cells were expanded from the same collagenase digest and designated as mitral VIC-7, VIC-G8, and VIC-B12. Two additional clones, mitral VIC-K5 and VIC-K19 were isolated from a second preparation from the same leaflet. Larger pieces of leaflet tissue were cultured on a gelatin-coated plate for 1-2 weeks. Interstitial cells migrated directly out from the leaflet tissue and once the cells covered two-thirds of the plate, clonal populations were prepared using the single cell isolation procedure described listed above, and expanded from 96 wells plates. Both mitral VEC and VIC cells were expanded on 1% gelatin-coated dishes in EBM-B and both cell types were passaged 1:3 or 1:4 every 6 to 14 days and used between passages 8 to 14. In some experiments the primary culture of mitral VIC was used (isolated just prior to preparation of the clones), and these cells were used between passages 2-5. Ovine carotid artery endothelial cells (CAEC) were isolated as described by collagenase (0.2% vol/vol final) and dispase (2.5 U/mL final) digestion for 1 hour at 37 degrees C[9]. Sheep endothelial colony forming cells (ECFCs) were isolated from peripheral blood samples as described [39]. Ovine bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (BM-MSC) were isolated as described [40]. Fibrocytes were isolated from human peripheral blood mononuclear cells [41]. Non-valvular ECs are not transformed cell lines. For experiments in this study, they were grown in EBM-B under identical conditions as the mitral VEC and VIC. Cells were grown in EBM-B or EBM-B with 2 ng/ml of TGFbeta1for four to five days. The media was replaced every two to three days. Upon completion of the experiment the cells were lysed and prepared for Western Blot, RNA extraction, or indirect immunofluorescence. Previous studies showed that ovine aortic VEC undergo EndMT in response to all three TGFbeta isoforms and that VEC express TGFbeta receptors [10,11]. For the co-culture experiments, cells were plated either in the insert or the bottom of 6 well TranswellTM plates at a density of 1*104cells/cm2, and allowed to adhere overnight. After 24 h the two cell types were placed in indirect co-culture by overlaying the inserts in wells containing the target cell. The co-cultures were treated for the specified times in EBM-B supplemented with TGFbeta1, as noted for each experiment. For CM experiments, cells were treated with CM that had been produced by the specified cell type for 24 h, at which point it was sterile filtered and added in a 1:1 ratio with fresh media to target cells. Media was replaced with fresh CM every 2-3 days. Ovine cells were removed from the culture plate with Cell Dissociation Buffer, (Gibco, Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY) fixed for 30 min in 4% paraformaldehyde, followed by 10 min in 0.5% saponin in 1% BSA/PBS. Cells were then washed and incubated with PE or FITC-conjugated Abs (anti-CD31 or anti-alpha-SMA) on ice for 60 min. Cells were washed twice and resuspended in 1% paraformaldehyde in PBS. Flow cytometric analyses were performed using a Becton Dickinson FACScan flow cytometer and FlowJo software. Cells were plated onto gelatin-coated coverslips or 8-well slides and fixed with ice-cold methanol for 20 min, then rinsed three times with PBS and incubated with respective primary Abs (mouse IgG, CD31, von Willebrand factor, VE-cadherin, vimentin, alpha-SMA) followed by species-specific FITC- or Texas Red-conjugated secondary Abs and DAPI to label nuclei. Images were taken using a 20* objective with an Axiophot II microscope (Zeiss, Oberkochen, Germany) equipped with AxioCam MRc5 (Zeiss). RNA was extracted and cDNA prepared as described [42]. Primers used are listed inSupplemental Table 1. All reactions were performed using Fast start SYBR Green PCR Master Mix, at the default setting on an ABI Biosystems StepOnePlus Real Time PCR Machine with the following temperature profiles: denature at 95 degrees C for 10 minutes, and 3 cycles of 95 degrees C for 15 sec, and 60 degrees C for 1 min. All PCR products were sequenced using ABI DNA sequencer (Dana Farber/Harvard Cancer Center DNA Resource core) to verify the sequence corresponded to the gene of interest. Amplification efficiencies for all genes were between 90-110%. Standard curves were generated, for relative quantification, and results were normalized to either to beta-actin or ribosomal protein S9 levels. Cells were lysed and analyzed by western blot as described [9,42]. Membranes were incubated with respective primary Abs (goat anti-human CD31, goat antihuman VE-cadherin, mouse anti-bovine eNOS, mouse anti-human alpha-SMA, and mouse antihuman beta-actin) and with secondary Ab (peroxidase-conjugated anti-mouse or anti-goat). Expression was quantified via densitometric analysis. In brief, pixel intensity of each lane was quantified in ImageJ, with background intensity subtracted from each lane. Pixel intensity for each lane was then normalized to intensity of the loading control, beta-actin. Leukocyte adhesion after exposure to inflammatory cytokines was used as an indicator of endothelial function. VEC monolayers were treated +/-TGFbeta1 and +/- CM as indicated in 35 mm culture plates. Following treatment, cells were challenged +/- 10 ng/ml of TNF-alpha for 5 hours to induce expression of leukocyte adhesion molecules. The human myeloid cell line HL-60 (2 * 106cells) was added and incubated at 4 degrees C in HL-60 media (RPMI1640 media with 20% FBS and 1% GPS) on a rocking platform for 45 min. Monolayers were washed five times with cold RPMI1640 media and fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 30 minutes. Adherent leukocytes were visualized and quantified using a phase-contrast microscope and ImageJ analysis software. Contractile activity was measured to assess the myofibroblastic or activated phenotype of VIC. Cells were plated in 6-well plates and/or in Transwells and cultured for 5 days with specified treatment. After 5 days, cells were trypsinized and seeded into collagen gels (3 mg/ml type I collagen, DMEM, 25mM HEPES, titrated to pH 7.3 with 1M NaOH). Gels were prepared at a volume of 0.5ml gel/well and allowed to polymerize for one hour at 37 degrees C. Following one hour, 1ml of EBM-B was added to each well, and gels were released from the sides of the plate with a 27-gauge needle. At time points indicated, the free floating gels were imaged using a camera and surface areas were calculated using ImageJ. The surface areas of free-floating gels without cells were used as control. Cells were plated in 96 well plates at a density of 10,000 cells/well in EBM-B. After 24 h, cells were treated with proline free media (DMEM, 1% GPS) for 30 min, and washed 3*5 min with PBS. 1uCi of3H proline was added per well, in proline-free DMEM, 1% GPS, 50ug/ml L-ascorbic acid. Cell supernatants were collected and protein was precipitated with 10% trichloroacetic acid and pelleted by centrifugation at 14,000 rpm for 30 min. The pellet was suspended in 0.3 ml of 0.3 M NaOH/0.3% SDS and incubated at 37 degrees C for one hour until solubilized, and added to 4 ml of liquid scintillation fluid. Cell associated collagen was quantified by washing the cell monolayers with PBS, removing cells from the plate with trypsin and precipitating with 1 ml of ice-cold 10% trichloroacetic acid. The precipitate was solubilized at 37 degrees C for 1h in 0.3 ml of 0.3M NaOH/0.3% SDS and added to 4 ml of liquid scintillation fluid. The acid precipitated (protein incorporated)3H counts were detected using a Perkin Elmer Tri-Carb2900TR liquid scintillation analyzer. Cells were plated at 10,000 cells/cm2in 96 well gelatin-coated plates in EBM-B, in triplicate. The next day the media was changed to EGM-2, 1% FBS, 1% GPS to serum-starve overnight. The following day, EBM-2 media was added back +/- 10ng/ml VEGF-A. Seventy-two hours later the Cell Titer96 Aqueous One Cell Proliferation Assay (MTS) reagent was added and absorbance at 490 nm was measured. qPCR data were analyzed as means +/- standard deviation; values were normalized to the control, which was set = 1.0, so that results from three separate experiments could be compiled. Data were analyzed by two-tailed t-tests assuming unequal variance, with p value less than 0.05 considered significant. HL-60 cell adhesion was analyzed as the average number of leukocytes adhered per cell, averaged over ten randomly selected visual fields of (100um * 100um). Data is expressed as mean +/- standard deviation. Statistical significance was determined using the one tailed Student's t-test, assuming unequal variance, with p value less than 0.05 considered significant. Gel contraction data was compiled as the average of three gels per experiment. Data were analyzed using the two-tailed Student's t-test, assuming unequal variance, with p value less than 0.05 considered significant. The mitral VEC clones used in this study, C4, C5 and E10, were previously characterized and shown to undergo TGFbeta-mediated EndMT [9]. Ovine mitral VIC are characterized inFigure 1. We analyzed ovine mitral VIC from the primary culture (primary) and five mitral VIC clones for expression of the endothelial marker VE-cadherin and the activated VIC marker alpha-SMA (Figure 1A). Mitral VEC clone E10 was analyzed in parallel as a positive and negative control, respectively, for VE-cadherin and alpha-SMA. Mitral VIC clones VIC-7, VIC-K5, and VIC-K19 did not express VE-cadherin whereas the primary VIC and clones VIC-B12 and -G8 showed low expression, perhaps indicative of the endothelial origin of VIC [12]. The VIC primary culture and the five VIC clones were positive for alpha-SMA, indicating an activated phenotype, as expected. VE-cadherin was not detected in the mitral VIC primary culture or in clone VIC-B12 by immunofluorescence (Figure 1B; BM-MSC served as a negative control while mitral VEC-C5 served as a positive control (Figure 1C). alpha-SMA and vimentin were detected in mitral VIC primary cells and clone VIC-B12 by immunofluorescence, further confirming the VIC phenotype. Mitral VEC C5 stained positive for endothelial markers CD31 and VE-Cadherin, but not for alpha-SMA (Figure 1C), as expected. The mitral VIC expressed VEGF-A, basic fibroblast growth factor and produced collagen, as measured by3H-proline incorporation (Supplemental Figure 1A). We used indirect co-culture to determine if mitral VIC produce factors that can diffuse across the 0.4 um filter of the TranswellTM and block EndMT. Mitral VEC, clone C5 or E10, were plated in bottom chambers and mitral VIC-7 were plated in upper chambers on Day 0 and cultured for 24 hours, separately, to allow cell attachment to occur without influence from the other cell type. After 24 hours, the upper chambers were moved onto the bottom chambers containing VEC (Figure 2A). Cultures were treated without or with TGFbeta1for 4 days, at which time the EndMT markers Slug, Snai1 and matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-2 were analyzed by qPCR. In addition, NFATc1, a transcription factor expressed in endocardial cushion cells that has been shown to mark cells that do not undergo EndMT [43,44], was also measured (Figure 2B). TGFbeta1caused a marked induction of Slug, Snai1 and MMP-2 and a reduction in NFATc1, as previously reported [45]. Co-culture with VIC resulted in a statistically significant reduction in TGFbeta1-induced Slug, Snai1 and MMP-2 and a statistically significant increase in NFATc1. Co-culture with VIC in the absence of TGFbeta had no effect on the expression of these markers. We also analyzed the EndMT marker alpha-SMA and the endothelial marker VE-cadherin by Western blot in VEC clone C5: co-culture with primary mitral VIC inhibited the TGFbeta1induced expression of alpha-SMA (Figure 1C). The same experiment was performed except that conditioned media (CM) from the primary culture of mitral VIC was placed in the upper chamber instead of VIC (Figure 2D). VEC were analyzed after 5 days and 8 days. CM added from Day 5-8 only was sufficient to reduce alpha-SMA in cells treated from Day 1-8 with TGFbeta1, indicating that the CM was effective even when added 5 days after TGFbeta1had been added. eNOS levels were maintained, indicating a healthy endothelial phenotype. The reduction in alpha-SMA in VEC treated with TGFbeta1was confirmed with three different mitral VEC clones and with three different VIC, as well as CM from three different VIC (Supplemental Figure 2A). InFigure 2E, quantification of alpha-SMA levels in TGFbeta-treated VEC are shown for three sets of co-culture experiments: VEC co-cultured with VIC primary cells (black bars), VEC co-cultured with VIC clone B12 (gray bars) and VEC co-cultured with VIC B12 CM (white bars). A statistically significant decrease in alpha-SMA was observed in the VEC in each co-culture setting. In a previous study, we showed human pulmonary VEC that underwent TGFbeta-mediated EndMT lost their ability to upregulate leukocyte adhesion molecules and bind leukocytes [11], a critical endothelial function. Therefore, we tested whether VIC CM could prevent a similar loss in TGFbeta1-treated mitral VEC. We treated the mitral VEC for 5 days as follows: EBM-B alone, EBM-B + CM-VIC, EBM-B + TGFbeta1, EBM-B + CM-VIC + TGFbeta1. All four cell cultures were stimulated with TNFalpha for four hours to induce expression of leukocyte adhesion molecules (VCAM-1, ICAM-1 and E-selectin). HL-60 cells were added to each treatment group for 45 minutes. TGFbeta1pre-treatment for 5 days abolished HL-60 cell adherence to the TNF-alpha-stimulated VEC monolayer (p less than 0.05) indicating a loss of a vital endothelial cell function due to EndMT. Concomitant treatment with CM from VIC significantly restored HL-60 cell adhesion to the VEC monolayer (p less than 0.05) (Figure 2E). Leukocyte adhesion in VEC treated with CM in the absence of TGFbeta1was not significantly different from the control (p=0.22). In summary, the results inFigure 2show that co-culture with VIC or CM from VIC maintains an endothelial phenotype. We used co-culture in TranswellTM plates again to examine the effect of mitral VEC on VIC (Figure 3A). Mitral VIC clone B12 or primary VIC exposed to VEC co-culture for 5 days showed a dramatic reduction in alpha-SMA (Figure 3B). Quantification of the alpha-SMA band intensities relative to beta-actin in VIC exposed to CM from VEC clones C5 and C4 is shown inFigure 3C. Statistically significant decreases in alpha-SMA were observed in both cases (n=3 for each). Corresponding western blots are shown inSupplemental Figure 3. The ability of VEC to reduce the activated VIC phenotype was confirmed by analyzing expression of alpha-SMA and SM22-alpha, another myofibroblast marker [46], by indirect immunofluorescence (Figure 3D). The percent alpha-SMA positive cells was reduced from 63% to 17% in VIC co-cultured with VEC while the percent SM22-alpha positive cells was reduced from 100% to 32% in VIC co-cultured with VEC (Figure 3D, bar graphs). We next analyzed expression of type I collagen and Chm1 mRNA by qPCR in VIC co-cultured with VEC or CM from VEC for 3 days, as inFig 3A. Type I collagen is increased in activated VIC; it is not expressed by VEC [6]. Chm1 is expressed in VIC in vivo and in vitro. Loss of Chm1 in cardiac valves leads to increased angiogenesis and valve degeneration [13,24]. Thus, we use Chm1 as an indicator of a quiescent healthy VIC phenotype. We tested the effects of two different mitral VEC clones and CM from three different mitral VEC on primary mitral VIC. The results of these experiments show that co-culture of VIC with VEC or CM from VEC significantly decreased collagen I (VIC + VEC, p = 0.03, VIC + CM-VEC p = 0.02) and significantly increased Chm1 mRNA (VIC + CM-VEC p = 0.03) (Figure 3E). This finding indicates that mitral VEC can promote the quiescent VIC phenotype. InFigure 3F, we tested the reversibility of the quiescent VIC state by treating VIC with CM-VEC for three days, and then either continuing to culture the cells in CM-VEC for two additional days, or removing the CM and replacing with EBM-B for 2 days. Lanes 1 and 3 show high levels of alpha-SMA in VIC cultured without CM at day 3 and 5. Lanes 2 and 4 show the suppression of alpha-SMA in VIC exposed to CM-VEC. In contrast, VIC treated for 3 days with CM-VEC followed by 2 days in EBM-B showed a restored level of alpha-SMA (lane 5 and bar graph). This indicates that the quiescent VIC phenotype requires continuous signal from the VEC when the VIC are grown on tissue culture dishes in EBM-B. As a control, we analyzed CM from VEC and VIC for effects on basal and VEGF-induced proliferation of VEC and VIC (Supplemental Figure 4A, B); no significant effects were observed. We measured contractility of VIC to assess cellular function in response to VEC. The free-floating collagen gel assay in which VIC were seeded on a collagen gels and allowed to contract the gels, is described in materials and methods. The gel surface area was measured over time, and plotted as percent reduction in gel area as an indication of contractile activity (Figure 4A-B). We optimized the assay (Supplemental Figure 4A) and tested a panel of cells including mitral VIC, VEC, and endothelial colony forming cells (ECFC) (Figure 4B). The endothelial cells (mitral VEC-E10 and ECFC) exhibited little to no contractile behavior while three mitral VIC contracted the free floating collagen gels, consistent with myofibroblast-like function. All three of the mitral VIC clones inFigure 4Btested positive for alpha-SMA expression, which confirmed their activated VIC phenotype. TGFbeta treatment to further increase VIC activation resulted in increased contraction (Supplemental Figure 4B), providing validation of the gel contraction assay [22]. We hypothesized that the reduction in VIC alpha-SMA and SM22alpha observed when VIC were co-cultured with VEC would correlate with a reduction in contractile activity of the mitral VICs, as there is evidence in the literature that alpha-SMA and SM22alpha play a role in cell contractility in smooth muscle cells [47]. To test this, VIC were treated with CM-VEC for 5 days (n=3) and then seeded in the collagen gel contraction assay. Gel contraction was measured at one hour (Figure 4C). CM from three different mitral VEC clones (C4, C5 and E10) significantly reduced the contractile activity of the primary VIC (p=0.02, p=0.001, p=0.006 for treatment with CM VEC-C4, VEC-C5, and VEC-E10, respectively). We used ovine BM-MSC to determine if a non-valvular mesenchymal cell could inhibit TGFbeta1induced EndMT in the mitral VEC. CM from BM-MSC inhibited TGFbeta-induced EndMT in the mitral VEC C5 (Figure 5A). As a control, we tested whether CM from endothelial cells would inhibit TGFbeta-induced EndMT. Endothelial CM from ECFC did not inhibit TGFbeta-induced EndMT in mitral VEC (Figure 5B). We also tested the ability of non-valvular endothelial cells, ECFC and carotid artery endothelial cells (CAEC), to suppress the activated VIC phenotype in the Transwell assay, as described inFigure 3A. ECFC and CAEC were similar in ability to induce a quiescent, alpha-SMA-low VIC phenotype (Figure 5C, gray bars). In a second arm of the experiment, VIC were treated with TGFbeta1to enhance the activated state of the VIC [23]. TGFbeta1-treated VIC did not respond to co-culture with ECFC, mitral VEC clone D6 or CAEC in that alpha-SMA protein expression was not reduced (Figure 5C, black bars). This indicates that TGFbeta1renders the VIC not only activated but resistant to soluble factors produced by endothelial cells. InFigure 5D, we showed that CM from mitral VEC or from CAEC was sufficient to suppress alpha-SMA in primary VIC. We tested the ability of the non-valvular endothelial cells to inhibit VIC function in the collagen gel contraction assay. CM from ECFCs showed a similar ability to reduce VIC contraction as CM from mitral VEC (Supplemental Figure 4C). This set of experiments indicates 1) that TGFbeta-mediated EndMT in mitral VEC can be prevented by CM from mesenchymal stem cells but not from endothelial cells and 2) the activated VIC phenotype can be suppressed by co-culture with non-valvular endothelial cells or with CM from non-valvular endothelial cells. This apparent lack of restriction to valve-derived cells suggests that it may be possible to use non-valvular cell sources to modulate these cellular events in valve diseases. Our study shows that mitral VIC produce soluble factor(s) that diminish TGFbeta-mediated EndMT in mitral VEC. The reduced EndMT was shown by decreased expression of EndMT markers and retention of a critical endothelial function - leukocyte adhesion. In turn, mitral VEC produce soluble factor(s) that dampen the myofibroblastic, activated properties of mitral VIC in culture. Mitral VIC co-cultured with VEC or conditioned media from VEC showed decreases in three hallmarks of myofibroblast-like, activated VIC -alpha-SMA, collagen I, and ability to contract collagen gels, and further, showed an increase in chondromodulin-1 (Chm1), a marker of healthy VIC. Bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells, cells that share some differentiative and phenotypic properties with VIC [48], were also able to mitigate TGFbeta-driven EndMT in VEC. Furthermore, we found that two types of non-valvular endothelial cells - ECFC and CAEC - were able to reduce the myofibroblastic phenotype of mitral VICs. These findings indicate that the ability to modulate these cellular activities is not restricted to valve-derived endothelial and interstitial cells. Our results show that cellular phenotypes found in healthy valves can be reconstituted, or at least approximated, when VEC and VIC are co-cultured without direct cell-cell contact using TranswellTM inserts. The alpha-SMA-positive phenotype observed in VIC grown on tissue culture plastic dishes has been attributed to the artificial nature of the in vitro setting. Our data indicate that a critical aspect of this artificial setting is theabsenceof endothelial cells. This in vitro finding fits well with the concept that the onset of activated VIC in vivo could arise from a disrupted or dysfunctional endothelium. There are several limitations to our study. The first is that other factors besides TGFbeta, such as low steady sheer stress and oscillatory shear stress [49], pathological cyclic strain [18], TNFalpha and IL-6 [19] can induce EndMT. Whether or not VIC or conditioned media from VIC would be able to prevent EndMT caused by these stimuli was not tested. A second limitation is that although we attempted to identify factors produced by the VICs that are responsible for blocking the TGFbeta-mediated EndMT, negative results were obtained. We investigated VEGF-A as a potential mediator because it is known to inhibit VEC EndMT, and is produced by the VIC (Supplemental Figure 1). Avastin, an anti-human VEGF-A antibody, failed to reverse the VIC mediated inhibition of EndMT, however additional experiments are needed to determine if ovine VEGF-A is recognized by Avastin. We also tested the possibility that heparin-binding (HB)-EGF produced by VIC might inhibit EndMT by adding CRM197, a recombinant protein that binds to HB-EGF and blocks its function [50,51]. Again negative results were obtained but binding of CRM197 to ovine HB-EGF could not be ascertained. A third possibility that was not tested was whether VIC secrete a factor that increases fibroblast growth factor signaling in the VEC as this could render the cells EndMT resistant [52]. Basic fibroblast growth factor is both present in the EBM-B media used to culture VEC, and is expressed by VIC (Supplemental Figure 1) but one might speculate that a factor produced by VIC could act downstream of the growth factor to stimulate FGF-receptors or downstream signaling molecules that could, in turn, reduce the ability of the EC to respond to TGFbeta [52]. It will be important to determine the nature and identify of the secreted factors and the mechanisms by which they prevent EndMT in future studies. Based on previous studies on aortic valves, a likely mediator released by the VECs to dampen the VIC activated phenotype is nitric oxide. Using a similar Transwell co-culture system, Bosse and colleagues showed that murine EC from endothelial nitric oxide synthase-knockout mice (NOS3-/-) were unable to block calcification in aortic VEC, but over expression of NOS3 in EC restored the activity [36]. Two groups showed a reduction in alpha-SMA, when porcine aortic VEC were directly co-cultured with porcine VIC [53,54], which was then blocked by the eNOS inhibitor L-NG-Nitroarginine Methyl Ester (L-NAME) [53]). NO released from VECs has been shown to decrease the myofibroblast-like and calcific phenotype in VICs [55]. One study reported only a small decrease in alpha-SMA in VICs when cells were in direct contact on tissue culture plastic, but observed a more significant decrease when cells were plated on a softer hydrogel substratum [54]. These differences in VIC responses could be due the variation in substrate stiffness, as indicated in previous studies [20,21,56]. It may be that VICs, in a more biocompatible setting, are more responsive to VEC influence. In summary, NO as a mediator of VIC phenotype has been increasingly reported in the literature. Another potential regulatory factor within VEC is endogenous TGFbeta1, which has been shown to be expressed in murine and human valvular endothelium [57-59]. When and if endogenous VEC TGFbeta plays a role in the reciprocal interactions between VEC and VIC would be an important topic to explore in the future. In summary, our study demonstrates reciprocal interactions between mitral VEC and VIC that sustain endothelial phenotype and function in TGFbeta-exposed VEC and promote a quiescent, non-contractile phenotype in VIC. The precise nature of the reciprocal interactions must be determined but our data indicate that direct cell-cell contact between VEC and VIC is not required but instead soluble factors produced by each cell type act in a paracrine manner. We speculate that disruption of these interactions may underlie the EndMT and activated VIC that appear in many types of valve disease. We further speculate that the disruptions may be caused by any number of disturbances to normal hemostasis such that the production of one or more of the putative paracrine factors is halted or altered. Further, restoration of VEC-VIC interaction in diseased valves may be achieved by supplementation or delivery of non-valvular EC and non-valvular mesenchymal cells to the damaged leaflets or cusps. Additional studies will be needed to test these concepts.