Schizophrenia is a severe neurological disorder whose etiology includes an important but poorly understood neurodevelopmental componentNone. A direct consequence of abnormal neural development may be cognitive impairments, which are observed in young children well before the onset of psychosisNone-None. Cognitive deficits result in part from non-salient thoughts and sensory information flooding the mind with irrelevant percepts due to impaired central filtering mechanismsNone-None. Neuronal filtering mechanisms are studied using prepulse inhibition of the startle reflex (PPI), a paradigm in which a weak 'prepulse' occurring 10-500 ms before a sudden intense stimulus suppresses the startle responseNone-None. Because disrupted PPI is observed in individuals at high risk for developing psychosis, abnormalities may reflect disturbances in neural development that predispose these individuals to diseaseNone. Genetic analyses of large patient cohorts are now yielding many candidate genes which contribute to schizophrenia risk making new tools for investigating the causal role of these genes essentialNone. Animal models with a well defined neuronal substrate for disease-relevant behaviors are an invaluable asset for investigating how genetic or environmental disturbances lead to neurological impairment. Supporting the use of PPI as an endophenotype which can be investigated using animal models, PPI defects in schizophrenia are present in prodromal phases of the disease and in unaffected relativesNone-None. Measurements of PPI in animal models are a standard method for analyzing the effects of genetic and pharmacological manipulations. However neuronal circuitry which mediates PPI is not fully understood, limiting the insights that these models can offer. Defining the precise identity and pattern of synaptic connectivity of neurons required for PPI would thus illuminate a substrate for investigating the effects of gene mutations which increase risk for schizophrenia and promote rational design of therapeutic interventionsNone. Systems neuroscience approaches have shown that core circuitry for PPI resides in the brainstem and that partially overlapping mechanisms mediate PPI at different interstimulus intervals (ISIs) between the prepulse and the startling stimulusNone-None. However detailed analysis of neuronal mechanisms for PPI in mammals remains a formidable challengeNone. In contrast startle circuitry in fish is relatively simple and is therefore an attractive system in which to dissect neuronal connectivity. Acoustic/vibrational stimuli elicit rapid escape responses triggered by the Mauthner cells, a single bilateral pair of giant reticulospinal neurons which are similar in position and function to the central brainstem neurons for the mammalian acoustic startle response (ASR)None-None. Because Mauthner-driven startle responses are all-or-nothing events, PPI is manifest as a reduction in the probability of eliciting a startle response, rather than a reduction in the magnitude of the response as in mammalsNone,None. PPI is robustly induced in larval zebrafish and reproduces salient features of the response in mammals, including the effective ISI and susceptibility to drugs that alter dopaminergic and glutamatergic neurotransmissionNone,None. However the identity of neurons which inhibit the startle response during PPI remains unknown. Here we exploited the amenability to genetic screens and less complex brain structure of larval zebrafish to reveal the molecular identity of neurons required for PPI in this species. We then extended our work to behavioral analysis of a mouse model to confirm that our findings are pertinent to mammals. Construction of the transgene used to recover enhancer trap lineEt(REx2-SCP1:Gal4ff)y252has been reportedNonebut briefly, this transgene contains the reduced toxicity Gal4 variant Gal4ffNonedriven by a minimal promoter consisting of tandem NRSE elements (REx2) and the supercore promoter 1 (SCP1)None. TheUAS:Kaedetransgenic line isTg(UAS:Kaede)s1999tNone. J1229isGt(T2KSAG)j1229aNone. 4xUAS:GFP is Tg(4xUASnr:GFP)c369None. vGlut:DsRedisTgBAC(vglut2.1:DsRed)andglyt2:GFPisTgBAC(glyt2:GFP)None. Tg(UAS:nfsB-mCherry)fish were generated as previously reportedNone. The UAS:Arch3 transgenic line was generated from a 14xUAS-E1b:Arch3-TS-CFP-ER transgene which was constructed as follows. Zebrafish codon optimized cerulean (Genscript) was amplified by PCR, adding the Kir2.1 membrane trafficking signal (TS) at the N-terminal and an endoplasmic reticulum (ER) export signal at the C-terminal as described for eNpHR3.0None, then cloned into pT1UMPNone. SS-PRL-Archaerhodopsin-3Nonewas synthesized, codon optimized for zebrafish (Genscript) then amplified by PCR and cloned in frame with the TS-CFP-ER cassette. The plasmid was injected into one cell stage embryos with Tol1 transposaseNoneand founders screened to isolate transgenic lineTg(UAS-E1b:Arch3-TS-CFP-ER)y259. TheUAS:lynTagRFPTline isTg(UAS-E1b:BGi-lynTagRFPT)y260which was made using Tol1 transgenesis using a previously described plasmidNone. For theUAS:Synaptophysin-RFPline overlapping extension PCR was used to fuse synaptophysin, amplified from UAS:Synaptophysin-EGFPNoneand zebrafish optimized TagRFPT. The product was cloned into pT1UMP and injected as above to isolate lineTg(UAS-E1b:Synaptophysin-TagRFPT)y261. For theUAS:nls-GFPline zebrafish codon optimized emerald GFP was synthesized (Genscript), PCR amplified adding the SV40 large T antigen nuclear localization sequence (MAPKKKWKV) to the N-terminal, cloned into pT1UMP and injected to isolate lineTg(UAS-E1b:BGi-NLS-emGFP)y262. All lines were maintained on a Tubingen long fin background and embryos raised in E3 medium supplemented with 1.5 mM HEPES pH 7.3 (E3/h) at 28 degrees C on a 14:10 light:dark cycle. Additional details of plasmid construction are available on request. All zebrafish protocols were approved by the NICHD animal care and use committee. Gsx1knockout mouse heterozygotesNone(kind gift of K. Campbell) were maintained on a CD1 background as in previous generations. Heterozygous mice were incrossed to non-littermates to generate litters ofGsx1+/+,Gsx1+/-,Gsx1-/-siblings for behavioral testing. Using the AIMS neonate ID system, sibling mice were genotyped at postnatal day (P)7-10 by PCR analysis of tail DNA extracted using the DirectPCR Tail buffer system and the manufacturer's protocol (Viagen). Genotyping primers were: CGGGTGAAGCACAAGAAAGAAG; CCAATGGTCCTCTAAAAGGCG; GGTTCATCATCACTAATCACGACG; CGCTGTTCTCCCTCTTCCTCATCTC resulting in a 220 bp band for the wild type allele and a 150 bp band for the knockout allele. Litters were maintained at no more than 8 pups per dam to promote mutant survival and to match group size as an additional control. All experimental protocols were approved by the NICHD animal care and use committee. Linker mediated PCRNonewas used to map the insertion site iny252. The site was confirmed by PCR on single embryos using chromosome 5 specific primer 5-TGCTTGTTGCTTGTTTTTGC with primer 5-TTGAGTAGCGTGTACTGGCATT, specific to one of the Tol2 arms yielding a 347 bp band for the transgene locus. A single band was present in allKaedepositive embryos from ay252; UAS:Kaedeoutcross to TL (N = 31). For subsequent genotyping ofy252, a multiplex PCR strategy was used, with primers 5-AGCAGAAATGTGCATCAAC and 5-TTGCTTGTTTTTGCAGTTGG which produce a 328 bp band for the wildtype genomic locus and a third primer 5-CAAGAATCTCTAGTTTTCTTTCTTGCT, yielding a 221 bp band for the transgene locus. For screening Gal4 lines, each line was crossed to aUAS:nfsB-mCherrytransgenic line allowing cell specific and temporally controlled ablation using metronidazole treatmentNone-None. Sibling larvae were sorted into strongly-expressing mCherry and non-expressing groups and both groups were treated from 3-5 dpf with 10 mM metronidazole in E3/h medium for ablation of nitroreductase-mCherry expressing neurons. Ablation was confirmed visually by checking for loss of patterned mCherry expression. Behavioral testing was performed after 24 h recovery from the treatment, at 6 dpf. Zebrafish larvae show two forms of startle response distinguished by latency and kinematics, Mauthner cell mediated short-latency c-start (SLC) and non-Mauthner long-latency c-start (LLC) responsesNone,None. SLC responses are susceptible to PPINoneand were therefore the focus of this study. In the initial PPI screen, a 500 ms ISI was used. For Arch3 experiments larvae were embedded in 2 % low melt agarose in a glass bottom Petri dish before the area caudal to the fins was removed so that the tail was free. The dish was mounted in a custom stage printed in ABS plastic using a uPrint rapid prototyping system (Stratasys, Eden Prairie, MN) attached to a compound microscope (Axioimager.A1, Zeiss). Tail movements were imaged with a camera (muEye IDS-1545LE-M, 1stVision, Andover, MA) and objective (infiniGage CW with 0.50x mag precision spacer) mounted in place of the condenser. To determine the latency threshold for distinguishing short-latency startle responses in head fixed embryos, larvae were tested 20 times with a vibrational stimulus and responses recorded at 200 Hz. Images were scored manually to determine the earliest time of tail movement. A 10X objective was used to focus light pulses (520 nm) delivered by a high power LED (UHP-Mic-LED-520, Prizmatix, Israel) onto the head of the larva. Infra-red illumination was used to visualize the tail, with light used for the Arch3 stimulus excluded with a long pass filter in the camera objective (NT54-662, Edmunds). Stimulus timing and image acquisition was coordinated using a digital-analog card (PCI-6221, National Instruments, Austin, TX) controlled by DAQtimer event control softwareNone. 520 nm illumination was started 500 ms prior to the stimulus to inhibity252neurons. To exclude trials in which larvae were engaged in spontaneous locomotor activity during presentation of the startle stimulus, images were collected 32 and 16 ms before the startle stimulus to check for tail movements. An image was taken 20 ms after the startle stimulus to identify short latency startle responses and another image 80 ms after the pulse to identify long latency startle responses. For PPI trials, the pulse was delivered 500 ms after the prepulse. LED illumination was present over the course of the entire trial when used (642 ms for startle, 1110 ms for PPI). Inter-trial intervals were 20 s long, and conditions were presented in a pseudorandom order across the experiment. Control trials included LED alone trials and no stimulus trials. Startle response, PPI experiments, baseline spontaneous movement, dark flash responses, kinematic analysis of swimming and the visual motor response were measured as previously describedNone,None,None. For the MK801 experiment, 6 dpf larvae were treated in groups of 20 per 6 cm dish with 30 muM MK801 (M107, Sigma) in 1% DMSO for 20 minutes before behavioral testing. Controls received 1% DMSO only. Acoustic startle and PPI were measured using the SR-Lab Startle Response System (San Diego Instruments, San Diego, CA). P20-21 pups were transported in a standard plastic cage with the dam and littermates to a lit holding room just outside of the testing room where they adapted for 30 minutes prior to testing. Two mice were removed at a time from their home cage for analysis, one per available testing chamber. Mice were enclosed so that they could just turn around inside Plexiglas tubes within the lit and ventilated testing chambers and allowed to acclimate for 3 minutes prior to the session. Background noise level was maintained at 65 dB for the duration of the test including during acclimation. For acoustic startle testing, mice were presented with 60 trials using a variable inter trial interval of 15-25 s. Trial types included no stimulus trials and trials of 40 ms bursts of 5 to 55 db above background noise pulses spaced at 5 db increments. Trials were presented across 5 blocks of 12 trials each so that no one trial was repeated in any single block. The trial types were presented in a pseudorandom order over the entire experiment. For PPI testing mice were presented with 5 trial types over 12 blocks with a variable inter trial interval of 15-25 s. Trial types included a 115 db 40 ms pulse alone trial to measure startle amplitude, and PPI trials of 20 ms bursts of a 70 or 90 db prepulse followed by the 40 ms 115 db startling pulse. For testing long ISI PPI we used prepulses presented 100 or 500 ms prior to the pulse. The trial types were presented in pseudorandom order across the experiment except for in the first and last block which contained only 6 pulse alone trials to assess initial baseline startle reactivity and habituation. Pulse alone trials from the first and middle blocks were used to calculate average startle magnitude used in PPI calculations. PPI was calculated as: [(average startle magnitude - average PPI trial startle magnitude)/(average startle magnitude)]*100. For both acoustic startle and PPI testing, startle amplitude was measured every 1 millisecond over a 100 ms period beginning at the onset of the startle stimulus. The maximum startle amplitude over this period was taken as the definitive startle magnitude if having occurred 40 ms or less following the stimulus. In mice, startle responses are measured by whole body movement and the apparent magnitude of the startle response is thus influenced by body weight (Supplementary Fig. 6A). As mutant pups were significantly smaller (Supplementary Fig. 6B), startle magnitude was normalized to body weights (g) recorded on a scale prior to testing. Locomotor activity was assessed by placing mouse pups into the corner of a novel open field chamber measuring 35*35 cm under low room lighting of ~30 lux and monitoring activity for 5 minutes using the ANY-Maze software (SDI, San Diego, CA, U.S.A.). Mice were tested during the second half of their light period. A black cloth was placed underneath four clear chambers arranged on the floor of the testing room to generate contrast, and solid white barriers were placed in between the chambers so that 4 mice could be tested at a time without seeing each other. Each chamber was divided into 9 equal square sections within the video analysis software. The inner most section was demarcated as the 'center' zone while the surrounding squares were marked as 'periphery'. Distance traveled, mobility time, and speed were analyzed across the entire chamber and in each zone. The minimum time immobile used was 5 seconds. Chambers were cleaned with 70% ethanol and dried between mice. TheGsx1probe forin situhybridization in zebrafish was as previously describedNone. Antibodies used were against GFP (1:200; A-11122, Invitrogen), Kaede (1:200; PM012, MBL International), TagRFP (1:200; NC9044899, Fisher), Maguk (1:100; 73-029, NeuroMab). Image analysis was performed using ImageJ and FluorenderNone. Forin situhybridization analysis in mouse, E10.5 embryos and E13.5 embryonic brains were prepared by fixation in 4% PFA in PBS followed by cryopreservation in a sucrose gradient and embedding in OCT medium as previously describedNone. Frozen sections were taken sagittally through E10.5 embryos at a thickness of 12 mum, and E13.5 brains were sectioned coronally through the brainstem at a thickness of 14 mum. Plasmids to generatein situprobes byin vitrotranscription were prepared by amplification of the 3' end (partial last exon and 3'UTR) ofAtoh1andGsx1from mouse genomic DNA and the product subsequently cloned into the pGEMT-easy vector (Promega). Primers are published in the Allen Brain Atlas (http://www.brain-map.org/). Thein situhybridization procedure was essentially as previously describedNone. Tissue was post fixed in 4% PFA to stop the NBT/BCIP colorimetric reaction with alkaline phosphatase (AP) and counterstained using 0.005% Nuc Fast Red (Polyscientific) then dehydrated through an EtOH gradient (50, 70, 95, 100%) and Xylene washes. Coverslips were mounted on the slides using Permount (Fisher). Photographs were taken at 5X magnification for E13.5 brains and 10X magnification for E10.5 embryos on a Zeiss Axioplan2 microscope equipped with a Leica DFC490 camera. was performed using SPSS 17.0 (IBM, Armonk, NY) and Gnumeric 1.10.16 (http://projects.gnome.org/gnumeric/). Graphs show mean and standard error. Post-hoc tests were Bonferroni corrected for multiple comparisons as appropriate and homogenous subsets calculated using the Student-Newman-Keuls test. In fish, PPI is manifest as a reduction in startle responsiveness when the prepulse precedes the intense stimulus at an ISI of 30-1000 ms, and as in mammals, suppression of the startle response is dependent on the ISI used and the prepulse intensity (Supplementary Fig. 1a)None-None. We used high speed video recording and computational image analysis to assess the responsiveness of zebrafish larvae to brief vibrational stimuli during startle alone and PPI trialsNone. To identify neurons required for PPI, we screened a library of transgenic zebrafish enhancer trap lines which express the Gal4 transcription factor in distinct populations of neurons (Fig. 1a). These lines were generated using a technique that restricts Gal4 expression to the nervous system, allowing functional analysis of these genetically targeted neurons in physiology and behaviorNone. Neurons labeled in each line were selectively ablated by using Gal4 to activate expression of a cytotoxin from a UAS promoter. After visually confirming ablation efficacy (Fig. 1b), larvae were tested for changes in PPI. After ablation, PPI was reduced by 45% at an ISI of 500 ms in transgenic lineEt(REx2-SCP1:Gal4ff)y252(y252) (Fig. 1c,Supplementary Fig. 1b). Unexpectedly, at ISIs of 30 and 120 ms, PPI was significantly increased (Fig. 1d) indicating that the change in PPI depended on the ISI. y252labels a prominent bilateral stripe of dorso-medially positioned neurons extending through the entire hindbrain continuous with the spinal cord. Transgene expression was also observed in the optic tectum, ventral forebrain and hypothalamus (Fig. 4b). After neuronal ablation iny252, movement kinematics during the startle response were normal indicating that changes in startle were not due to motor system defects (Supplementary Fig. 2a-d). It is unlikely that larvae failed to detect the prepulse because larvae showed an increase in startle responsiveness (Fig. 1e), and a shorter response latency (Supplementary Fig. 2e). Moreover, because groups of ablated and control larvae matched for startle responsiveness retained significant differences in PPI, these differences could not be attributed to increased startle sensitivity (Fig. 1f). The differential effect ofy252neuron ablation on PPI at long and short ISI implies that different mechanisms mediate PPI during distinct temporal windows, consistent with findings from pharmacological and lesion studies in mammalsNone. Ablation caused additional behavioral phenotypes including a loss of responsiveness to a light flash stimulus and reduced baseline swimming activity (Fig. 1g,Supplementary Fig. 2). Despite the low baseline activity, after ablation, larvae showed a significant increase in swim distance after a change in illumination, indicative of hyperactivity (Fig. 1h). Neurons expressing Gal4 in they252enhancer trap line are thus required for multiple behaviors including modulation of startle sensitivity and PPI. To test whether neurons iny252are directly required for PPI, neuronal excitability was acutely suppressed using the green light-activated proton pump Arch3None. For these experiments, we established a semi-restrained preparation allowing illumination of the brain through a microscope objective, while using a stage-mounted speaker to provide an acoustic/vibrational stimulus for eliciting startle responses (Fig. 2a, b;Supplementary Fig. 3). Tail movements were monitored using a second objective, allowing us to measure startle responsiveness and PPI. We usedy252to activate expression of a UAS:Arch3-CFP transgene and selected fish with strong CFP expression, and non-fluorescent siblings that lacked either the Gal4 (y252) transgene or the UAS reporter. Because acoustic startle responses are initiated with a latency of less than 20 ms after the stimulus, they were easily distinguished from locomotor responses to the sudden increments in light intensity which have broadly distributed response latencies of 100-500 msNone. Thus in these experiments, any tail movement observed within 20 ms of the stimulus was classified as a startle response, and illumination alone did not elicit tail movement responses during this window (paired t-test t33= 0.93, p = 0.36;Fig. 2c). When illuminatedy252; UAS:Arch3larvae showed an increase in startle responsiveness while sibling control larvae were not effected (Fig. 2b, d). We next tested PPI, using a 500 ms ISI as in our initial screen and found that illumination reduced PPI by 38% iny252; UAS:Arch3larvae but had no effect on siblings (Fig. 2e). Acute and reversible silencing ofy252neurons thus phenocopied the effects of ablating these neurons confirming that transgenic liney252expresses Gal4 in neurons required for PPI at long ISI and regulation of the startle response threshold. To analyze howy252neurons are involved in PPI, we first examined their neurotransmitter profile. Prominenty252transgene expression was observed in a bilateral longitudinal column of dorso-medially located neurons extending along the rostro-caudal axis of the hindbrain (Fig. 3a). In the hindbrain, neurons with a defined neurotransmitter type are also arranged in distinct longitudinal columnsNone,None-None. In transverse and dorsal sections, columns of glutamatergic, GABAergic and glycinergic neurons are seen to be intercalated with columns occupying different mediolateral positions (for exampleFig. 3b) specified by a code of regionally expressed transcription factors. We characterizedy252neurons using transgenic lines which express fluorescent proteins in glutamatergic and glycinergic columnsNone,None. y252neurons were situated in the second most lateral of the four columns of glutamatergic neurons in the caudal hindbrain (Fig. b-d). Moreover, in triple transgenicy252; UAS:nls-GFP; vGlut:DsRedlarvae, GFP and DsRed were strongly co-expressed throughout the rostro-caudal extent of the hindbrain (Fig. 3e-g), and single confocal slices confirmed thaty252neurons were predominantly glutamatergic (Fig. 3j-l). However, scatteredy252neurons showed co-expression with the glycinergic neuron marker, mostly in the caudal hindbrain (Fig. 3h-i and m-o). Next we examined connections betweeny252neurons and the Mauthner cell which is localized in the brainstem and is required for short latency startle responses that are inhibited during PPI. Usingy252to drive a membrane-tagged RFP reporter line, we found that axons fromy252hindbrain neurons projected ventrally, running in close apposition to the lateral dendrite of the Mauthner cell and extending beneath the Mauthner cell soma and initial axon segment (Fig. 3p, q). To determine whether synaptic contacts may exist betweeny252neurons and the Mauthner cells, presynaptic terminals ofy252neurons were marked using a synaptophysin-RFP reporter. The lateral dendrite of the Mauthner cell strongly colocalized with RFP puncta and additional sparse puncta were also observed on the soma (Fig. 3r). Immunostaining against post-synaptic density proteins confirmed that these puncta represent synapses (Fig. 3s). The post-synaptic side of glutamatergic synapses is demarcated by Maguk family proteins (PSD95/93, SAP-97)None. Maguk immunofluorescence opposed RFP puncta in two areas on the lateral dendrite of the Mauthner cell (Fig. 3t-w) including a region at the distal tip of the lateral dendrite, which receives acoustic input from neurons of the statoacoustic ganglionNone. These data thus implicate glutamatergic neurons as an intrinsic part of the neuronal mechanism for PPI. Genetic and pharmacological evidence have implicated dysregulation of glutamate signaling in schizophreniaNone-Noneand glutamate receptor antagonists produce schizophrenia-like symptoms including reduced PPINone. After bath exposure to the NMDA receptor antagonist MK801, larvae showed increased PPI at short ISIs, reduced PPI at long ISIs and increased startle responsiveness (Fig. 3x-z) similar to the phenotype ofy252ablated larvae and consistent with previous findingsNone,None. These results show thaty252neurons form synapses closely adjacent to startle initiating neurons and suggest that mechanisms involving glutamatergic neurotransmission are involved in regulating the startle response during PPI at distinct temporal windows. Transgenic reporters in enhancer trap lines frequently recapitulate the expression pattern of adjacent genesNone. We used linker-mediated PCRNoneto map the integration site of the Gal4 transgene iny252to a locus 21 kb upstream ofgenomic screen homeobox 1(Gsx1) on chromosome 5 (Fig. 4a). Gsx1is a homeodomain containing transcription factor with a highly dynamic pattern of expression during neural development. Expression is first detected in the hindbrain and subsequently observed in several regions of the nervous system including the spinal cord, optic tectum, hypothalamus and ventral forebrain in both fish and mice (Supplementary figure 4a-e)None,None. Throughout development,Gsx1showed a very similar neuroanatomical pattern of expression to the Gal4 reporter iny252(Fig. 4b, c). In the spinal cord,Gsx1specified neurons are reported to comprise a population of dorsally located glutamatergic interneurons as well as a late-born population of GABAergic neuronsNone-None, similar to the identity of neurons in the spinal cord iny252(Supplementary figure 4f-h). Finally, confocal analysis of hindbrain sections ofy252embryos stained forgsx1and anti-GFP demonstrated thatGsx1and Gal4 were co-expressed (Fig. 4d-f). Taken together, these data strongly indicate thaty252is an enhancer trap forGsx1. Gsx1promotes the maturation of interneurons in the mammalian subpallium,Noneand is downregulated to allow migration of interneurons into the cortical plateNone. Cortical interneuron development is of intense interest for understanding the etiology of schizophreniaNoneand several genome-wide studies for neuropsychiatric disorders including schizophrenia have suggested the presence of vulnerability loci which map nearGsx1(Supplementary Table 1). To determine whether our finding that neurons with developmental expression ofGsx1are required for PPI in fish is relevant to neuronal mechanisms of PPI in mammals, we analyzed the expression ofGsx1in mouse brain regions previously reported to be linked to PPI. We first confirmed the finding thatGsx1is expressed in longitudinal stripes extending through the developing mouse hindbrainNone. Usingin situhybridization on coronal sections through E13.5 mouse brainstem we observed robustGsx1expression in discrete bilaterally symmetric domains at the ventricular zone of the neuroepithelium in the medulla (Fig. 5a-b, d). Next, we examined expression in proliferative zones which give rise to brain regions linked to PPI. Two primarily cholinergic nuclei of the mesopontine tegmentum have been implicated in PPI: the laterodorsal tegmental nucleus and the pedunculopontine tegmental nucleus (PPTg)None-None. Progenitors for these regions includeAtoh1expressing cells which migrate from the rhombic lip at E10.5None. In situhybridization showed thatGsx1is expressed in a region adjacent to theAtoh1domain but that these transcription factors are not co-expressed (Supplementary figure 5). Two other areas that may contribute to PPI in mice are the inferior and superior colliculiNone-None. Gsx1expression was observed at the ventricular zone of the neuroepithelium of both of these regions (Fig. 5c, e). We then analyzed PPI inGsx1knockout mice. BecauseGsx1homozygous knockout mice have growth retardation and a high mortality rate after post-natal day 14, it was not possible to study adult homozygous mutantsNone. Instead, we analyzed responses in mice at P20-21 which is several days after PPI is first detectedNone. When tested with a range of stimulus intensities, homozygotes showed similar weight-normalized startle responsiveness and latency to siblings (Fig. 5f,Supplementary fig. 6a-c), indicating that knockout mice are not hearing impaired. Mutant pups showed a significant overall reduction in PPI compared to littermates (Fig. 5g,Supplementary Figure 6d). PPI in heterozygotes was not significantly different from wildtypes at this stage, nor in 8 week old juvenile mice (Supplementary fig. 6e). In posthoc tests, at a 100 ms ISI the stronger prepulse induced significantly less PPI in homozygous knockout pups than in siblings; this reduction was also significant when mutants and siblings with similar startle reactivity were compared (Fig. 5h). ThusGsx1is required for normal PPI in mice suggesting that it has a conserved functional role in the development of startle modulating neurons across vertebrates. Gsx1likely has additional conserved functions in neuronal circuit formation because in a novel open field test, mutant mice showed reduced mobility (Fig. 5i) but during movement events, moved 45% more quickly than siblings (Fig. 5j) similar to the motility phenotype of fish after ablation ofGsx1neurons. Our findings demonstrate that neurons required for PPI show developmental expression of the homeodomain transcription factorGsx1. Ablation ofGsx1expressing neurons produced an ISI-dependent deficit in PPI in zebrafish, andGsx1knockout mice exhibited a robust reduction in PPI. Genetic manipulations offer improved cell type specificity over methods based on lesions or pharmacology for suppressing cell function. However deficits produced by ablation or gene knockout might perturb neuronal development or activate compensatory mechanisms. In our experiments this is unlikely, because optogenetic silencing ofGsx1expressing neurons produced a reduction in PPI indicating that these neurons are directly required for normal PPI. Gsx1has a dynamic pattern of expression during neuronal development, with a prominent early stripe of expression observed in the dorsal hindbrain. We found thatGsx1hindbrain neurons are primarily glutamatergic and form synapses in close apposition to neurons which initiate startle responses, the Mauthner cells. Together, the acute requirement forGsx1neurons during PPI and the fact that they likely directly connect to central startle initiating neurons strongly argues that these neurons are an intrinsic part of the neuronal mechanism for inhibition of the startle response during PPI. To identify neurons required for PPI, we established a novel genetic screening method based on ablation of neurons in randomly generated enhancer trap lines which frequently report the expression of nearby genes. These lines can be rapidly generated, are easily mapped and provide a tool for visualizing and manipulating the targeted population of neuronsNone. Mutagenesis screens in zebrafish have been previously used to isolate gene mutations which perturb behaviorNone-None. However, it is challenging to subsequently map the underlying genetic mutation and analyze how it disrupts neural function. In invertebrates, recent studies have instead screened libraries of transgenic animals with specific patterns of reporter gene expression. The reporter is used to inactivate neurons allowing their contribution to behavior to be assessed. Like mutagenesis screens, such screens are 'unbiased', and therefore able to identify components of a neural pathway withouta prioriknowledge. This approach also recognizes that neurons rather than proteins are the fundamental unit of circuitsNone. Because vertebrates share a fundamental brain architecture, insights from studies in fish may help to elucidate circuits operating in the mammalian brain. PPI in fish and mammals is behaviorally similar and susceptible to disruption through similar pharmacological agents; however we recognize that differences in the underlying neuronal circuitry will likely exist. Neurons in the hindbrain are patterned according to a dorso-ventral transcriptional code similar to that which acts in the spinal cordNone,None. Spatially, in fish these transcription factors are expressed in distinct mediolateral domains, while in mice, progenitor domains are organized in dorsoventral stripes. The dorso-medial expression ofGsx1in zebrafish caudal hindbrain is therefore similar in position to expression ofGsx1at the dorsal ventricular zone of the medulla. Thus after finding that neurons with developmental expression ofGsx1are required for PPI in zebrafish, and noting the similar expression pattern ofGsx1during neural development in fish and mouse, we tested whetherGsx1is also required for PPI in mice. The PPI phenotype ofGsx1neuron ablated zebrafish was recapitulated inGsx1knockout mice, however mice, unlike fish, did not show elevated startle sensitivity. This may reflect differences in circuits for startle control between species, but also could be due to the distinction between the effect of removing neurons from a circuit through ablation or silencing, and perturbing neuronal development through gene disruption. However, our finding that in both cases, PPI was disrupted supports the idea thatGsx1plays a conserved role in specifying neurons that are a key part of the neuronal circuitry for sensorimotor gating. In mammals, startle responses are triggered by giant reticulospinal neurons of the pontine nucleus caudalis (PNc) which receive short latency acoustic input and make monosynaptic inputs to motor neurons in the spinal cordNone,None. PNc neurons show reduced electrical activity during PPI trials but the precise identity of neurons which regulate PNc neuron activity during PPI remains unclearNone-None. Pharmacological and lesion experiments suggest that multiple neuronal mechanisms mediate PPI at different ISIsNone,None. PPI is intact after complete transection of structures anterior to the midbrain indicating that core circuitry for PPI resides in the brainstemNone. Lesions in several brainstem regions disrupt PPI, including in the inferior colliculus, the superior colliculus, the substantia nigra pars reticulata, the laterodorsal tegmental nucleus (LDTg) and the pedunculopontine tegmental nucleus (PPTg)None-None,None-None,None. Intriguingly, we observedGsx1expression at the ventricular zones underlying the inferior and superior colliculi, and in a region adjacent to a progenitor domain for LDTg and PPTg neurons. Tracing experiments show that PPTg neurons project to the PNcNone. PPTg lesions reduce PPI at an ISI of between 100 and 500 ms and may also increase baseline startle amplitudeNone,None. In recordings from rat brain slices, stimulation of the PPTg inhibits the response of giant reticulospinal neurons in the PnC to auditory inputNone. This effect can be suppressed by the application of cholinergic antagonists in the PNc, consistent with the large population of cholinergic neurons in the PPTg. Whether the PPTg directly modulates PNc reticulospinal neurons (or their presynaptic input), or acts via local interneurons in the PNc is unclear. Moreover PPTg stimulation does not inhibit PNc responses to auditory stimulation for all ISIs, and cholinergic antagonists only suppress this effect for long ISIs, indicating that the PPTg pathway and/or cholinergic signaling represents only part of the mechanism for PPI. Although most work has focused on the function of cholinergic PPTg neurons, the PPTg contains large intermingled groups of glutamatergic and GABAergic neurons which could also regulate the PNcNone-None. Gsx1neurons in the zebrafish hindbrain are primarily glutamatergic. There are several mechanisms by which glutamatergic neurons could regulate Mauthner cell responsiveness. We observed strong apposition of presynaptic elements fromGsx1neurons with Maguk immunofluorescence on the distal part of the Mauthner cell lateral dendrite. This region receives input from the acoustic nerve leading to the possibility thatGsx1neurons presynaptically regulate acoustic input to the Mauthner cellNone. Our pharmacological data suggests an important role for NMDA receptors in regulating PPI. As presynaptic NMDA receptors negatively regulate transmitter release from primary sensory neurons in rat, one possibility is thatGsx1neurons regulate acoustic input to the Mauthner cell through presynaptic NMDA receptorsNone. AlternativelyGsx1neurons may directly inhibit the Mauthner cell through metabotropic glutamate receptors. ManyGsx1presynaptic puncta on the Mauthner cell did not colocalize with immunostaining for Maguk, which is generally used to delineate ionotropic glutamatergic synapsesNone. These synapses may therefore represent metabotropic glutamate receptors which trigger postsynaptic inhibition of the Mauthner cell through secondary messenger cascades. In addition, it should be noted that while most hindbrainy252neurons were glutamatergic, a small population co-localized with a glycinergic marker. During neural development in fish, many glycinergic neurons co-express GABANoneandGsx1has an established role in specifying both glutamatergic and GABAergic neurons in the spinal cordNone-None. Our data thus does not exclude the possibility thaty252neurons mediate PPI through direct inhibitory signaling to the Mauthner cell. Finally,Gsx1neurons may act indirectly by regulating activity in interneurons which regulate Mauthner excitability. One class of candidate neurons are the Passive Hyperpolarizing Potential neurons which regulate the Mauthner cell firing thresholdNone. Indeed electrophysiological recordings have demonstrated that PPI in fish is in part mediated by decreased excitability of the Mauthner cell. Following the prepulse, the Mauthner cell shows shunting inhibition and loss of a non-linear current response that normally drives the membrane toward its firing thresholdNone-None. However these mechanisms act on a shorter timescale than behavioral PPI indicating that additional mechanisms must be present. Because ablation produced increased startle responsiveness, increased short ISI PPI and decreased long ISI PPI,Gsx1neurons may regulate startle responsiveness using some or all of these mechanisms for different behavioral functions. Many psychiatric disorders including schizophrenia, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, and autism spectrum disorders are believed to be caused in part by abnormalities of brain development. There is converging evidence that non-specific disruptions in developmental pathways underlie shared aspects of these diseasesNone. Several lines of evidence support the idea that schizophrenia has a strong neurodevelopmental origin, including early childhood cognitive and motor impairments and increased risk associated with pre and peri-natal eventsNone,None-None. However specific neurodevelopmental consequences remain poorly understand in part because neuroanatomical findings in schizophrenia have been inconsistent and because progressive changes during the course of the disease make it difficult to identify developmental abnormalitiesNone. Nevertheless deficits have been found repeatedly in cortical interneurons which regulate the balance of excitation-inhibition suggesting that perturbations in interneuron generation during fetal development predispose the brain to psychosisNone. Mouse studies have revealed roles forGsx1and its homologGsx2in regulating proliferation and differentiation of neuronal progenitors in ventral telencephalic regions that generate forebrain interneuronsNone,None. Loss ofGsx1exacerbates defects in neurogenesis of striatal and olfactory bulb neurons seen inGsx2mutantsNone-None. Gross changes in cortical interneuron populations have not been described in doubleGsx1/Gsx2knockout miceNone, however increasedGsx1expression profoundly disrupts progenitor domains from which these neurons are derived and suppresses interneuron migration into the cortical plateNone-None. In the spinal cord early expression ofGsx1is involved in the specification of excitatory neurons, while late expression regulates the differentiation of both excitatory and inhibitory neuronal populationsNone. Thus, perturbations in the timing of expression ofGsx1during neural development may lead to subtle changes in the number or molecular identity of forebrain interneurons. Genome-wide association and linkage studies for several psychiatric disorders including schizophreniaNone-None, have suggested the presence of vulnerability loci nearGsx1but noGsx1orGsx2mutations have been reported in psychiatric disorders. As knockout mice for these genes have severe postnatal defects ultimately leading to death, involvement ofGsx1in neurological dysfunction would most likely be due to changes in the regulation of its expressionNone,None. Gating defects are posited to represent a fundamental abnormality in schizophrenia leading to cognitive processes being overwhelmed by sensory impressions and their associationsNone. PPI is a robust measure of sensorimotor gating of the startle response and PPI deficits in schizophrenic patients correlate with the degree of thought disorderNone. However, the neurophysiologic basis for reduced PPI in schizophrenic patients remains unclear. It has been proposed that reduced PPI in schizophrenia is due to altered activity in a modulatory circuit comprising forebrain nuclei, acting on core PPI circuits which reside in brainstem regionsNone. However PPI is impaired in unaffected relatives of schizophrenic patients, implying that PPI defects may not be secondary to psychosis but represent an independent phenotypeNone,None. It has been suggested that PPI defects in schizophrenia reflect impaired attention to the prepulse, however some (although not all) studies have found reduced PPI in schizophrenic patients at ISIs as short at 30 ms, too brief to allow attentional modulationNone-None. PPI defects may therefore not be a consequence of disrupted forebrain function, but rather represent an independent abnormality in brainstem circuitry for startle modulation. An intriguing possibility is that a class of interneurons with common neurodevelopmental origins in brainstem and forebrain has a basic role gating information flow in multiple brain regions. Perturbations in these neurons would therefore produce independent disruptions in PPI and cortical information processing. Previous work has implicatedGsx1as a key player in neuronal development in the telencephalon. Our study shows that neurons with developmental expression ofGsx1have an essential role in neuronal circuitry that is involved in PPI, thus providing a molecular link between the specification of forebrain neurons and brainstem circuits which regulate the transmission of sensory information. (a) Prepulse inhibition in zebrafish larvae. Red marker indicates the probability of short latency C-bend responses to the acoustic stimulus alone (no prepulse condition). Curves show response probability to the startle stimulus when preceded at the indicated interval by a prepulse of different magnitudes. (b) Histogram showing the mean change in prepulse inhibition in ablated larvae compared to non-transgenic siblings for each of 46 transgenic Gal4 lines tested. DeltaPPI = (%PPI in ablated larvae) - (%PPI in sibling controls), where %PPI is the percent reduction in startle responsiveness during PPI trials. For each line, the sibling controls were non-fluorescent fish that were treated with metronidazole and tested in parallel. Metronidazole treatment of Gal4;UAS:nfsB-mCherryexpressing fish did not alter mean PPI (change in PPI from non-expressing controls -0.7% +/- 12.3%, mean/std, p=0.70). (a) Head orientation (relative to starting orientation, inset) during the larval startle response with annotation of kinematic measures used to compare response performance in control and ablated larvae in (b-e). C1 max AV refers to the maximal angular velocity attained during the initial C-bend. (b-d) Movement kinematics during acoustic startle responses in control andy252ablated larvae (N=109, 119 responses). No significant differences were observed. (e) Reaction time (latency from stimulus to initiation of a Mauthner mediated startle response) is significantly reduced iny252ablated larvae. * p less than 0.001. (f) Visual responsiveness to a 1 s long reduction in light intensity. Controls perform a stereotyped O-bend response within 800 ms of the light decrement. N = 5 groups controls, 3 groups ablated larvae. * p less than 0.001. (g) Baseline activity (0-20 min) and motor response to sustained darkness (20-40 min) in control (black) and ablated larvae (blue). Traces show mean distance moved (pixels) per 2.5 s bin. Illumination condition indicated on x-axis. N = 36 larvae each group. (h) Quantification of the response in (g). Both groups show a large increased in activity at the peak of the response to darkness (grey, 23-25 min) compared to baseline activity (yellow, 0-20 min). * p less than 0.001 paired t-test. (a) Dorsal epifluorescent image of 5 dpfy252; UAS:Arch3larva. Outline of larvae indicated. Dark patches are pigment obscuring view of fluorescence in brain. (b) Semi-restrained preparation showing larvae head-embedded in agarose with the tail free to move. (c) Latency histogram for responses in embedded larvae. Graph shows mean number of responses made at a given latency for individual larvae (grey, N=10) and mean of all larvae (black). (d) Computational identification of tail movements. In each trial, three images of the tail were taken: 32 and 16 ms before and 16 ms after the stimulus. Images were thresholded, analyzed and classified as no response (left), swimming activity before the stimulus (middle) or a short-latency response (right). (e) Confusion matrix showing accuracy of response classification by comparison of manual observation ('Manual') to computational analysis ('Code') for 256 trials. (f) Response probability to a vibrational stimulus of increasing intensity. Both short latency (filled circles) and long latency (open circles) responses increase demonstrating that the system produces graded responses as for free swimming fish. N = 10 larvae. Main effect of intensity for SLC responses F4,36= 16.97, p less than 0.001; for LLC responses F4,36= 14.67, p less than 0.001. (g) PPI in head-embedded larvae. Graph shows response probability to the prepulse alone, the pulse alone, or during prepulse-pulse (PPI) trials. N=6 larvae. * p = 0.011. (a-e) RNAin situhybridization forGsx1during neuronal development in zebrafish. (a) 12 hpf. Hindbrain (bracket) and midbrain (asterisk). (b) 20 hpf. Ventral forebrain (fb), midbrain (mb), and throughout the dorsal hindbrain (hb). (c) 30 hpf. Dorsal spinal cord (sc), developing hypothalamus (hyp), tectum (tec). (d) 48 hpf. Note loss of expression in spinal cord. (e) 72 hpf. Expression in forebrain is weak. Cerebellum (cer). Eyes removed to visualize brain structures. (f-h) Lateral confocal section of spinal cord iny252; UAS:Kaede; vGlut:DsRed. y252neurons (green) are dorsally positioned and show partial overlap with the glutamatergic neuron marker (red, arrows) but manyy252neurons are not glutamatergic (arrowheads). Inset shows coronal projection. (a), (c), (e) Expression ofAtoh1in the rhombic lip (arrows) in sagittal sections of an E10.5 stage embryo. Each panel is approximately 50 mum apart. (b), (d), (f) Expression ofGsx1in consecutive sagittal sections to (a, c, e) respectively of a stage E10.5 mouse embryo. Gsx1expression does not extend into theAtoh1expressing rhombic lip region (arrows). Scale bars a-f = 100 mum. (g) Schematic of a dorsal view of the head of a E10.5 mouse embryo. Purple box shows area shown in a-f, dashed lines represent lateral to medial sections. Dark gray area is the rhombic lip (rl). (a) Startle magnitude in wildtype P21 pups correlates with weight. Mean Vmax of responses to startle stimuli (110-120 dB) versus weight (N = 21). Measures show a moderate correlation which is significant (Pearson r = 0.426, p = 0.021). (b)Gsx1knockouts (P21) are significantly smaller than littermates (ANOVA main effect of genotype F2,33= 76.06, p less than 0.001; no effect of sex F1,33= 0.196, p = 0.661). Post-hoc homogenous subsets are indicated. Numbers indicate N for each group. (c) Latency to peak response (Tmax) to a 120 dB acoustic startle stimulus is not different inGsx1knockout mice (F2,36= 0.046, p = 0.96). N for each group is shown. (d) PPI inGsx1knockout mice (N=13), wildtype (N=17) and heterozygous siblings (N=33) at a 500 ms ISI. No significant differences between groups. (e) PPI in 8 week oldGsx1heterozygous mice (N=6) and wildtype siblings (N=5) at a 100 ms ISI. Repeated measures ANOVA F1,9= 0.51, p = 0.49.