Gliomas are the most common primary tumours of the central nervous system, with glioblastomas (GBMs) being the most malignant entity. The poor prognosis of GBM patients is largely due to the highly invasive nature of these tumours. These invading cells are extremely resistant to radiation and chemotherapy, and currently, there are no anti-invasive therapies available (NakadaNone, 2007,2013). A better understanding of the glioma invasion mechanism will help in developing therapeutic strategies to combat GBM. An increasing body of evidence suggests that a subpopulation of tumour stem-like cell properties in glioma, called either glioma stem-like cells (GSCs) or glioma-initiating cells, is responsible for tumour formation, maintenance, and malignant progression (SinghNone, 2003;TamaseNone, 2009;NatsumeNone, 2011). These rare tumour cells are characterised by their strong tumourigenic properties and self-renewal ability. It is critical to understand how the properties of GSCs make them particularly difficult to eradicate. From our data and data from other studies, it is clear that GSCs are primarily responsible for invasion (LiuNone, 2006;BeierNone, 2007;TamaseNone, 2009). However, the molecular features of GSCs that orchestrate the invasion process remain to be elucidated. If we can identify the responsible molecules that mediate GSC invasion, these molecules may represent promising targets for the development of novel anti-invasive therapies. In GSCs, the expression of some neural stem markers such as nestin, SOX2, and Musashi-1 has been reported (IgnatovaNone, 2002). In addition, CD133 has been evaluated as an enrichment marker for GSCs; however, several studies have demonstrated their limitations as specific markers (BeierNone, 2007;WangNone, 2008). To date, there is no perfect GSC marker that can isolate these cells alone. GSCs tend to form neurospheres in the specific culture medium containing various kinds of growth factors, such as epidermal growth factor (EGF) and basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF). The neurosphere assay is one of the reasonable methods for isolating GSCs. However, a previous report showed that the microenvironment in the neurosphere induces cell differentiation, suggesting that the neurosphere cannot maintain the stem cell properties on its own (PollardNone, 2009). Therefore, it is difficult to obtain pure cell groups of GSC. However, it is reasonable to investigate the molecular characteristics of GSCs using cell groups that containing high numbers of GSCs. In this study, we used neurosphere methods and cell sorting with CD133 as a marker in order to investigate the biology of GSCs. Integrins are cell surface migration-promoting receptor glycoproteins that mediate various intracellular signals through interaction with the extracellular matrix (ECM). Integrins also have a significant role in the attachment of cells to the ECM, through the formation of cell adhesion complexes, consisting of integrins and many cytoplasmic proteins. In particular, in GBMs, integrins participate in the regulation of complex processes, such as invasion, tumour growth, and angiogenesis by interacting with the ECM in the brain (NakadaNone, 2007). A phase II clinical trial demonstrated that combining the integrin inhibitor cilengitide with standard chemoradiation improved the survival of patients with newly diagnosed GBMs (NaborsNone, 2012). Currently, cilengitide is under phase III clinical trials for patients with GBM and the results will be reported soon (KurozumiNone, 2012). In this study, we report that GSCs attach to fibronectin and laminin and highly express integrinalpha3. The immunohistochemistry demonstrated that integrinalpha3 is localised in GBM cells, especially in invading cells and cells surrounding vesselsin vivo. Additionally, overexpression of integrinalpha3 increases glioma migration and invasion, whereas downregulation of integrinalpha3 inhibits glioma invasion concomitant with a change in the phosphorylation level of the extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) 1/2 pathway. These results suggest that integrinalpha3 have significant roles in the invasive behavior of GSCs through the activation of ERK1/2. Under an institutional review board-approved protocol and an informed consent from patients, fresh human GBM tissues were obtained from two patients who underwent therapeutic removal. Histological diagnosis was made by standard light-microscopic evaluation of the sections stained with hematoxylin and eosin. The classification of human brain tumours used in this study is based on the revised World Health Organisation criteria for tumours of the central nervous system (LouisNone, 2007). For GBM neurosphere formation, cells were cultured in DMEM/F12-based serum-free growth medium containing insulin (25 mug ml-1), transferrin (100 mug ml-1), progesterone (20 nM), sodium selenate (30 nM), EGF (20 ng ml-1), and bFGF (20 ng ml-1) as described previously (TamaseNone, 2009;MuraguchiNone, 2011). All reagents were from Sigma-Aldrich (St Louis, MO, USA) except for EGF and bFGF, which were obtained from Invitrogen (Carlsbad, CA, USA). Primary antibodies recognising the following proteins were used for immunostaining assays: CD133 (Miltenyi Biotec, Auburn, CA, USA), Nestin (Abcam, Cambridge, England), integrinalpha3 (monoclonal; Abcam),beta-actin (Sigma-Aldrich), ERK1/2 (Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA), and phosphorylated ERK1/2 (Thr 202/Tyr 204; Cell Signaling Technology). PD98059, a mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) kinase inhibitor, was purchased from Cell Signaling Technology. Spheres were grown in precoated chamber slides and fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 30 min at room temperature, and permeabilised for 5 min in 0.1% TX-100 PBS buffer. After washing with PBS, cells were blocked with 2% BSA and 3% goat serum and incubated with following antibodies: anti-CD133/2 (1 : 10), anti-nestin (1 : 200), and integrinalpha3 (1 : 200) for 1 h at 25 degrees C. Controls were stained with a 1 : 50 dilution of preimmunisation goat sera. Primary antibodies were detected using Alexa Fluor 488-labeled goat anti-mouse IgG or Alexa Fluor 594-labeled rabbit anti-goat IgG (Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR, USA). Fluorescence was monitored by inverted confocal laser microscopy (LSM510 META SP; Carl Zeiss AG, Oberkochen, Germany). Tumour neurospheres were seeded onto a six-well plate coated by fibronectin (10 mug ml-1; Sigma-Aldrich) or laminin (10 mug ml-1; Sigma-Aldrich) and incubated in the sphere medium described above at 37 degrees C with 5% CO2. They were observed after 72 h.Human astrocytoma cell lines U87, U251, T98G, and SNB19 (American Type Culture Collection, Manassas, VA, USA) were maintained in DMEM supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) at 37 degrees C.The cells from surgical specimens and cell lines were suspended in labeling buffer (0.5% bovine serum albumin and 2 mM EDTA in PBS). The cells were incubated with indirect CD133 MicroBead Kit (Miltenyi Biotec) for 30 min at 4 degrees C. Cell sorting was performed by autoMACS (Miltenyi Biotec), and later, the CD133 positively labeled with the magnetic microbeads were separated to obtain the positive fraction as previously described (OhtsukiNone, 2007). QRT-PCR was carried out in a LightCycler (Roche Diagnostics, Indianapolis, IN, USA) as described previously (NakadaNone, 2006). PCR was performed with the following primers: CD133(NM_006017.1): sense, 5'-TTGTGGCAAATCACCAGGTA-3' antisense, 5'-TCAGATCTGTGAACGCCTTG-3' (amplicon size, 162 bp); integrinalpha2(NM_002203): sense, 5'-TTGACCTATCCACTGCCACA-3' antisense, 5'-GTCAGAACACACACCCGTTG-3' (amplicon size, 200 bp); integrinalpha3(NM_002204): sense, 5'-GGAAGGAACAAAGACAGGCAAAC-3' antisense, 5'-GGTAGTGGTGAGTGAGAAGTGGC-3' (amplicon size, 150 bp); integrinalpha5(NM_002205): sense, 5'-CTACAATGATGTGGCCATCG-3 -3' antisense, 5'-GGATATCCATTGCCATCCAG-3' (amplicon size, 198 bp); integrinalphav(NM_002210): sense, 5'-AACTCAAGCAAAAGGGAGCA-3' antisense, 5'-TGCAAGCCTGTTGTATCAGC-3' (amplicon size, 223 bp); andbeta-actin(NM_001101): sense, 5'-CTACAATGAGCTGCGTGTGGC-3' antisense, 5'-CAGGTCCAGACGCAGGATGGC-3' (amplicon size, 271 bp). The LightCycler analysis software was used to analyse the PCR data, as described previously (NakadaNone, 2010). Immunohistochemistry was performed using an avidin-biotin immunoperoxidase technique as previously described (NakadaNone, 2005). Anti- integrinalpha3 antisera or rabbit preimmune sera were used at a dilution of 1 : 200. Western blot analysis was performed according to the standard procedure as described previously (NakadaNone, 2005). All antibodies were used at a dilution of 1 : 500. An expression plasmid for human integrinalpha3 was designed as described previously (MizunoNone, 2008). Transient transfection into U87, SNB19, and U251 cells was done using Effectene (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA). The overexpression by transient transfection using Effectene lasted for at least 96 h as described previously (NakadaNone, 2006). Cells transfected with empty plasmid vector were used as controls. Purified, duplexed siRNAs for integrinalpha3 and control luciferase were purchased from Qiagen. The two target sequences of human integrinalpha3 (Genbank accession number NM_002204) were designed to be unique relative to the sequences of other integrin members; siTGA3-1 and siTGA3-2, catalogue number SI02628094 and SI02664095, respectively. Twenty nanomolar siRNA was transfected into cells cultured in 60-mm-diameter dishes using Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen). Transfected cells were cultured for 48 h before use. The effects of siRNA lasted for at least 96 h as described previously (NakadaNone, 2006). Chemotactic migration on fibronectin and laminin and invasion into Matrigel (Becton Dickinson, Franklin Lakes, NJ) of cells was measured in a modified Boyden chamber (Neuroprobe, Gaithersburg, MD, USA) as described previously (YoshidaNone, 2010). Statistical analyses were done using the unpaired Student'st-test for comparison between the two groups. Statistical significance among the three groups was assessed using Bonferroni Dunn test. P less than 0.05 was considered significant. To confirm the expression of stem cell markers such as CD133 and nestin in GSCs extracted from GBM surgical specimens, immunocytochemistry was performed for the tumour neurospheres. CD133 and nestin were found to be expressed in the tumour neurospheres originating from two GBM specimens (Figure 1A). Additionally, differentiation of neurospheres was induced by adding 10% FBS. Immunocytochemical analysis with glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), Olig2, andbetaIII-tubulin antibodies demonstrated positive staining, suggesting that the neurospheres obtained had multi-lineage potential, which is a characteristic of GSCs (Supplementary Data S1). It has been reported that glioma-initiating cells are maintained in a tumour vascular microenvironment as the niche (Li and Neaves, 2006;CalabreseNone, 2007). As adhesion to the ECM is important for glioma-initiating cells to remain in the vascular niche, we investigated whether tumour spheres are capable of attaching to fibronectin and laminin, representative components of the ECM. As shown inFigure 1B, both tumour spheres attached to fibronectin and laminin. This suggests that glioma-initiating cells express the receptors for fibronectin and laminin. Because the integrin family has been described as having a role in cell adhesion, we evaluated the expression of the integrinalphafamily members, especiallyalpha2, 3, 5, and v, which are known to be expressed in glioma (D'Abaco and Kaye, 2007), in CD133+and CD133-cells isolated from four glioma cell lines and two GBM specimens. RNA was isolated from each cell population, and the expression levels of CD133 and integrinalphafamily members were determined by QRT-PCR usingbeta-actin mRNA as an internal quantitative reference. We confirmed that the levels of CD133 expression (CD133 mRNA/beta-actin mRNA ratios) were significantly higher in the cells extracted as CD133+cells by autoMACS than in CD133-cells in all the cell lines and surgical specimens (Figure 2A). Among the integrinalphafamily members tested, only integrinalpha3 was overexpressed in CD133+cells relative to CD133-cells (2.4-240-fold) in all the cell lines and surgical specimens (Figure 2B). Consistent with this observation, the expression of integrinalpha3 was confirmed in tumour neurospheres by immunocytochemistry (Figure 2C). Intriguingly, it has been previously reported that integrinalpha3 can be a receptor for both fibronectin and laminin (D'Abaco and Kaye, 2007). Accordingly, we focused on integrinalpha3 for further experiments. Cells expressing integrinalpha3 in the normal brain and GBM specimens were identified using immunohistochemical analysis. Integrinalpha3 was localised predominantly to neoplastic astrocytes in GBM specimens (21 out of 25 cases;Figures 3A and B). Invading neoplastic cells as well as glioma cells surrounding vessels also showed significant staining for integrinalpha3 (Figures 3C and D). Neoplastic astrocytes were identified by nuclear atypia in H E-stained sections and were confirmed by immunopositivity for GFAP staining (data not shown). No staining was observed when the primary antibody was substituted with normal serum (Figure 3E). Normal cells showed no immunopositivity (Figure 3F). According to the well-known hypothesis that GSCs are highly invasive and are localised surrounding vessels, the so-called tumour niche (LiuNone, 2006;CalabreseNone, 2007), these data suggest that GSCs express integrinalpha3in vivo. To determine the function of integrinalpha3 in common glioma cell lines, the endogenous level of integrinalpha3 in four glioma cell lines was assessed by QRT-PCR and western blotting. As shown inFigure 4A, integrinalpha3 expression is highest in U87, which has previously been shown to be the most rapidly migrating cell line among the four glioma cell lines tested (NakadaNone, 2004,2006). To evaluate the potential role of integrinalpha3 in the invasive behavior of human gliomas and to verify that integrinalpha3 could provide a potential therapeutic target, the migration assay was performed using an siRNA technique. We used two different siRNA sequences (siITGA3-1 and siITGA-2) specifically to silence endogenous integrinalpha3 expression in U87, U251, and SNB19 cells, which exhibit evident integrinalpha3 protein expression (Figure 4A). No obvious phenotypic changes were observed upon knock down of the integrinalpha3 gene in glioma cell lines (data not shown). The inhibition of integrinalpha3 mRNA by both siITGA3-1 and siITGA-2 was approximately 90% this did not affect the expression levels of other integrin family members (data not shown). Figure 4Billustrates the reduction of integrinalpha3 protein expression in integrinalpha3 siRNA-transfected U87, SNB19, and U251 cells as compared with its expression in luciferase siRNA-transfected controls. U87 and SNB19 cells transfected with integrinalpha3 siRNA showed significantly lesser cell migration on fibronectin (40%-82%) and laminin (40%-63%) than cells transfected with control siRNA. By contrast, U251 cells, which express lower levels of endogenous integrinalpha3 than seen in U87 and SNB19 cells, showed a smaller effect on the reduction of migration by siRNA on fibronectin (0%-23%) and laminin (20%-27%) relative to control cells (Figure 4C). These data confirm the role of integrinalpha3 in the promotion of migration in glioma cells. To further examine the functional effects of integrinalpha3, the expression vector of integrinalpha3 was transiently transfected into the glioma cell lines utilised for siRNA experiments. As shown inFigure 5A, integrinalpha3 was successfully transfected into U87, SNB19, and U251 cells. No obvious phenotypic change was observed upon overexpression of the integrinalpha3 gene in glioma cell lines (data not shown). As expected, integrinalpha3 overexpression in all the three cell lines resulted in increased cell migration on both fibronectin and laminin, relative to that for mock-transfected cells (Figure 5B). U251, which has the lowest expression of integrinalpha3, showed the highest effect on invasion promotion on fibronectin and laminin (2.1-fold and 4.2-fold, respectively) upon the forced expression of integrinalpha3, whereas U87, which has the highest expression of integrinalpha3, showed the lowest effect of invasion promotion by integrinalpha3 overexpression (1.3-fold and 1.5-fold, respectively). These data support the specific role of integrinalpha3 signaling in the promotion of cell migration. Next, an invasion assay was performed in U87 cells. The data showed similar outcomes to those seen in the migration assay. Two independent integrinalpha3 siRNAs inhibited cell invasion through membranes coated with Matrigel (50% less than that of control). By contrast, invasion was greater in cells overexpressing integrinalpha3 in U87 cells than in mock-transfected cells (2.6-fold) (Figure 5C). Taken together, these data indicate that interference with or forced expression of integrinalpha3 retards or accelerates glioma cell migration and invasion, respectively, suggesting a role of integrinalpha3 as an invasion promoter. As a possible mechanism by which integrinalpha3 regulates glioma cell invasion, we investigated the correlation between the expression of integrinalpha3 and ERK1/2, whose signaling was tightly linked to glioma invasion (NakadaNone, 2013). The total and phosphorylated protein levels of ERK1/2 in glioma cell lines manipulating integrinalpha3 expression were examined by western blotting, and the association of ERK1/2 signaling with integrinalpha3 levels was analysed. To observe the maximum change in signaling, we used U251 cells, which express low levels of integrinalpha3, for overexpression, and U87 cells, which express high integrinalpha3 levels, for siRNA treatment. In integrinalpha3-overexpressing U251 cells, phosphorylated ERK1/2 levels were higher along with increased total protein level, as compared with those in the control vector-transfected cells (Figure 6A). Thus, the production and activation of ERK1/2 were induced by integrinalpha3 signaling. Consistent with these data, the protein expression and phosphorylation levels of ERK1/2, along with inhibition of integrinalpha3 expression in U87 cells transfected with siRNA against integrinalpha3, were clearly lower than those for control siRNA treatment (Figure 6A). The expression and activation of other molecules that are involved in glioma invasion, such as Akt and matrix metalloproteinases, did not change upon manipulating the expression of the integrinalpha3 gene in glioma cells (Supplementary Data S2). We hypothesised that ERK1/2 is a major signaling molecule linked to integrinalpha3 in glioma invasion. To confirm this, we examined the role of ERK1/2 downstream of integrinalpha3 in glioma cells. An invasion assay was performed using U251 cells transfected with empty vector or integrinalpha3 with PD98059, which is a potent and selective inhibitor of MAPK kinase (MEK), the kinase immediately upstream of ERK1/2. Inhibition of MEK/ERK signaling suppressed the migration of mock-transfected U251 cells by 0.8-fold. Moreover, PD98059 treatment completely abrogated the integrinalpha3-induced invasion of U251 cells (Figure 6B). Taken together, these data indicate that integrinalpha3 is strongly associated with ERK1/2 production and activation and that this interaction is critical to the glioma cell invasion induced by integrinalpha3. Previous studies have shown that GSCs have high invasive potential (LiuNone, 2006;BeierNone, 2007). We aimed to reveal invasion-promoting genes in GSCs. Based on our data that GSCs attached to the ECM components, the expression of integrin family members was screened. Our data demonstrate that integrinalpha3 is specifically overexpressed in GSCs obtained from glioma cell lines and GBM surgical specimens by two different methods. Consistent with this observation, the immunohistochemical results indicated that integrinalpha3 is localised in invading glioma cells and glioma cells surrounding vessels, where the stem cell niche is believed to be locatedin vivo. Additionally, integrinalpha3 promotes the migration and invasion of glioma cells via the ERK1/2 pathwayin vitro. Taken together, these data suggest that integrinalpha3 has a crucial role in GSC invasion. Accumulated evidence indicated that integrins are expressed in stem cells and promote cell migration via ECM stimulation and the subsequent induction of migration signaling (Hynes, 2002;Desgrosellier and Cheresh, 2010;Ellis and Tanentzapf, 2010). Similarly, neurospheres originated from neuronal stem cells attach to the ECM through integrin, and its signaling contributes to neuronal migration and differentiation (KearnsNone, 2003;LeoneNone, 2005;FlanaganNone, 2006). Our study revealed that GSCs also attach to the ECM. The specific pattern of integrin expression suggests that GSCs, similar to neuronal stem cells, are dependent on integrin for attachment to the ECM. Among the integrin family members, we focused on integrinalpha3 because it was overexpressed in CD133+cells compared with CD133-cells in all the cell lines and GBM neurospheres tested, and spheres of GSCs attached to fibronectin and laminin, for which integrinalpha3 could be a receptor (D'Abaco and Kaye, 2007). Immunocytochemical analysis confirmed the expression of integrinalpha3 in spheres of GSCs. Coincidentally, recent work has identified integrinalpha6, which was not included in our investigation, as a glioma stem-cell marker and invasion promoter (LathiaNone, 2010). Taking these findings into consideration, we propose that integrin has a crucial role in the stem cell properties of glioma cells, such as their high invasiveness potential. Additional studies will be required to dissect the role of integrinalpha3 andalpha6 in glioma stem cell biology. The data in the present study using siRNA and expression vectorin vitrohave demonstrated that integrinalpha3 is an invasion-promoting molecule in glioma cells. Our results are consistent with previous work using a blocking antibody against integrinalpha3, which indicated that integrinalpha3 is involved in the invasive character of glioma (FukushimaNone, 1998;FujiwaraNone, 2001). Moreover, integrinalpha3-specific expression in invading GBM cells shown by immunohistochemical analysis agrees with the previous finding of positive staining for integrinalpha3 in invading glioma cells in a mouse glioma model (MahesparanNone, 2003). The expression level of integrinalpha3 in glioma cell lines is positively correlated with its invasive capacity as shown by our previous reports (NakadaNone, 2006,2010). Taken together, these observations indicate that integrinalpha3 has major role in glioma invasion. As integrins are obligate heterodimers containing two distinct chains, called thealphaandbetasubunits, we should consider not only thealphabut also thebetasubunits. Among thebetasubunit members, thebeta1 subunit has an important role in glioma biology, and its expression has been correlated with the invasive behavior of gliomas (PaulusNone, 1996). Previous data showed that integrinbeta1 controls proliferation, differentiation, and migration in neural stem cells (CamposNone, 2004;TateNone, 2004). Integrinalpha3 can form a specific heterodimer with thebeta1 subunit (FukushimaNone, 1998). This may support the importance of integrinalpha3 andbeta1 subunit heterodimers in GSCs. Analysis of the expression of integrinbetasubunits in GSCs is ongoing in our laboratory. Previous studies have reported that integrinalphavbeta3 cooperates with platelet-derived growth factor receptor and activates the Ras-ERK/MAPK signaling pathway, inducing glioma cell proliferation (Guo and Giancotti, 2004). Integrinalpha3beta1 has been shown to activate ERK in some epithelial cells (GonzalesNone, 1999). However, the signal transduction of integrinalpha3 in the context of glioma migration and invasion remains unclear. This study is the first to demonstrate that integrinalpha3 promotes glioma invasion via ERK1/2. Similarly, it has been reported that ERK1/2 regulates glioma stem cell invasion through the co-localisation of N-cadherin and integrinalpha6 (VelpulaNone, 2012). In our study, the change in ERK1/2 phosphorylation seems to be attributed to the downregulation of ERK1/2 expression, although many reports have suggested that integrin can alter ERK1/2 phosphorylation levels without any change in ERK expression. Phosphorylated ERK can dimerise and translocate into the nucleus, where it phosphorylates many substrates, including transcription factors (Ramos, 2008), suggesting that ERK might possibly regulate its own expression. Further analysis will be necessary to investigate the molecular mechanism of ERK regulation by integrin. In summary, we have shown that GSCs have elevated levels of integrinalpha3, which is localised in invading cells and at the stem cell niche and can promote glioma cell invasion via ERK1/2. Our discovery of the involvement of integrinalpha3 in glioma stem cell invasion provides the insight that targeting integrinalpha3 has profound consequences on the glioma stem cell phenotype and may thus provide a therapeutic target for GBMs.