Global population growth, which is expected to reach greater than 9 billion by 2050, together with environmental concerns, including climate change, is placing greater pressure on our planet's finite natural resources (1). In the past century alone, population growth and modernization of human societies have led to unprecedented changes in ecosystems and increased demands for food, fresh water, fiber (e.g., textiles), and energy (e.g., fossil fuel). The food system of the future must meet the nutritional requirements for the health of our future generations but will also depend on the sustainability of natural ecosystems in ways that are economically, socially, and environmentally viable (2,3). Beyond increasing agricultural production, meeting future demands for food will require sufficient amounts of nutrient-rich foods to ensure availability of nutritionally adequate, high-quality diets across the globe (4,5). Nutritionally adequate diets are essential for normal growth and development and play an important role in lowering disease risk, including both communicable and noncommunicable chronic diseases (6,7). Agricultural systems are part of a larger food system that includes producing, processing, food manufacturing, and distribution to consumers. The food choices that form dietary patterns, in turn, affect the demand for production of agricultural products. Sustainable food systems are critical for achieving healthy, sustainable diets. Although the concept of sustainable food systems is not new (8), how foods and dietary patterns interconnect with ecosystems and use of natural resources in ways that are environmentally, economically, socially, and culturally sustainable is garnering increasing interest. Whether framed as sustainable food systems (1), sustainable agriculture (2), sustainable diets (9), or sustainable food consumption (1), the common theme is production of sufficient amounts of nutritious foods to support the health of future generations while conserving natural resources and minimizing environmental impacts (None). Given the complex nature of this challenge, systems-based frameworks for food and sustainable nutrition have been proposed (10,11). Sustainability definitionsStudies examining environmental impacts of individual foods and dietary patterns are now beginning to emerge, but they vary considerably in design and research methodology. The aim of this article is to examine published research on environmental impacts of dietary patterns, specifically habitual eating patterns, dietary recommendations, and a variety of different dietary scenarios. Different approaches to research designs, methodologies, and data sources are discussed and considered within the larger framework of achieving population health and global sustainability. Research on this topic cuts across multiple disciplines, including agriculture, nutrition and health, animal science, environmental sciences, social sciences, economics, and policy. Articles included in this review were identified through conventional keyword searching strategies by using PubMed, bibliographies of published papers, and searches of sustainability-related journals. Only studies that examined impacts of dietary patterns on at least one indicator of environmental sustainability were included. Every effort was made to include all relevant published literature across the globe as of 2 April 2014; however, given the cross-disciplinary nature of this topic, some articles inadvertently may have been omitted. Socially and culturally diverse dietary patterns are evident across the globe and within individual countries. Thirty-one studies that examined impacts of dietary patterns on at least one environmental indicator were identified, with more than two-thirds published between 2010 and 2014. Twenty-one were from Europe, 5 from the United States, 1 from New Zealand, 3 from developing regions of India and China, and 1 comparing regions across the globe (None-None). Two-thirds of the studies worldwide and half from Europe included assessment of the climate impact of eating patterns, specifically greenhouse gas emissions (GHGe)None. Impacts of dietary patterns on indicators of land capacity were examined in 12 studies, energy/fossil fuel use in 4 studies, water use in 7 studies, and environmental impacts to human health in 2 studies. One study compared environmental impacts of different dietary patterns on natural resource use, ecosystem quality, and human health; and 2 studies reported environmental impacts of dietary patterns as a combined index. Associations between the nutritional quality of different self-selected diets and GHGeNoneCO2eq, carbon dioxide equivalents; GHGe, greenhouse gas emissions; ISO, International Organization for Standardization; LCA, life cycle assessment. Environmental impacts of habitual diets, recommended diets, and/or theoretical dietsNoneCO2eq, carbon dioxide equivalents; EU27, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, and the United Kingdom; EU28, EU27 plus Croatia; GHGe, greenhouse gas emissions; IPCC, Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change; ISO, International Organization for Standardization; LCA, life cycle assessment; NY, New York State; UK, United Kingdom. The 10 regions were as follows: sub-Saharan Africa, centrally planned Asia including China, Europe including Turkey, independent states of former Soviet Union, Latin America, Middle East/North Africa, North America, Pacific region (including Japan, Australia, New Zealand), Pacific (or South East) Asia, and South Asia including India. Diet modeling to identify nutritionally adequate diets with lower GHGe and diet costsNoneCO2eq, carbon dioxide equivalents; GHGe, greenhouse gas emissions; LCA, life cycle assessment; UK, United Kingdom; WWF, World Wildlife Fund. Environmental impacts of diets in developing regions of the worldNoneCO2eq, carbon dioxide equivalents; GHGe, greenhouse gas emissions; LCA, life cycle assessment. Environmental impacts of habitual eating patterns, dietary recommendations, and theoretical diets were examined by using various indicators of GHGe, land and agricultural capacity, primary energy use, and water use. Indicators of economic impacts were included in a few studies, although not from all relevant perspectives. Limitations and inconsistencies of research in this emerging area underscore the need to standardize methodology. It remains critical before recommendations for sustainable diets can be made to build a strong scientific foundation of high-quality studies; comprehensively weigh multiple aspects of the environmental, economic, and social dimensions of sustainability; and concurrently address the global challenges of overconsumption and obesity and underconsumption and food insecurity. Interest in the impact of dietary patterns on climate change is evident by the relative number of studies examining links between diet patterns and GHGe. Global climate change is associated with increased emissions from greenhouse gases, which typically include emissions from carbon dioxide, NH4and N2O, collectively reported as carbon dioxide equivalents (CO2eq). Although many studies have examined the impact of diet patterns on climate change, the research to date remains inconclusive. The considerable variability in the diet patterns examined, inconsistencies in methodologies used, and lack of agreement on the appropriate unit of expression for diet comparisons are important considerations when reviewing this collective body of literature. In addition, given only a limited number of foods have been evaluated using life cycle assessment (LCA), considerable extrapolation is needed to make many of these assessments. Understanding the impact of extrapolating limited LCA values to an entire diet is critical to making proper and informed dietary guidance recommendations. Summaries of individual studies can be found inTables 2-5. GHGe associated with a variety of highly diverse diet patterns, which included habitual, recommended and theoretical diets, has been reported. Comparability across studies, however, is hampered in many cases by limited information about the composition of the diets studied, differences in sources of GHGe data across studies, and whether the diet-related GHGe were based on consumption (eating patterns), agricultural food commodities, or food supply data inherently accounting for food spoilage and waste. Descriptive information on the diet patterns studied was wide-ranging, from scant in some studies to very comprehensive and well referenced in others. In the absence of clear descriptive accounting of the diets studied, systematic comparisons of diet-related impacts on GHGe across different studies are not feasible. For example, national dietary recommendations, which are designed to help consumers choose foods to construct healthful diets, generally provide food group-based guidance (e.g., increase consumption of fruits and vegetables, etc. ), which can be applied broadly to socially and culturally diverse diets (6). However, how broad recommendations actually get implemented (e.g., which fruits and vegetables actually get increased) may matter considerably when looking at environmental impacts. Unfortunately, details of the foods included in the recommended diets were lacking in most studies. Another limitation of the research on diet-related impacts on GHGe to date is that GHGe data are available only for a limited percentage of food items relative to the thousands of foods that are available and consumed. Whereas country-specific standard nutrient databases are used to determine the nutrient composition of diet patterns, similar national standard databases of GHGe are not available. GHGe data for foods among the diets studied ranged from 9 to 391 food groups or food items (12-24). By comparison, in the United Kingdom and the United States, for example, the nutrient composition of the habitual diets is based on the nutrient content of ?5000 foods consumed by the respective populations (25,26). In many studies, diet-related GHGe were based on consumption-level data (foods as consumed) (12,13,15,19-21,23,27); however, in others, GHGe from agricultural commodities were the source of the diet-related GHGe (16,18,28,29). Some studies (14,17,18,28) reported daily per capita GHGe, taking into account food spoilage and waste. Food waste occurs across the entire supply chain and has been estimated in the range of 10-40% of all food produced; however, a reliable evidence base for assessing food waste globally is lacking (30). Understanding the impact of limitations and differences in available GHGe data on conclusions of environmental impacts of diets is needed. LCA is the primary method used to assess the GHGe of diet patterns (31); however, flexibility in international standards [International Organization for Standardization (ISO) 14040 and ISO 14044] (32,33) and the absence of standard LCA databases for representative foods in the marketplace has led to methodologic variability across studies. A critical assessment of LCA methods in food- and diet-related research was published by Heller et al. (31). LCA data for foods in the studies reviewed were largely from the published literature, and in some studies, assumptions, extrapolations, and substitutions were used for missing LCA data. Some studies, for example, relied on LCA data from other countries because within-country GHGe data for foods were lacking (22,23). Some studies of diet-related impacts examined only GHGe from agricultural production of food commodities on farms (16,18,28,29), whereas others included the aggregate of GHGe across multiple points in the food supply chain. Several studies included GHGe across most of the food supply chain (farm-to-retail) but not from the point of purchase to the home (retail-to-home; i.e., transportation to the home, storage, preparation, and food waste by the consumer) (12,15,19-23). Only 2 studies of dietary impacts on GHGe covered the entire life cycle; farm-to-consumer (with the exception of transportation from retail to home) (13,27). The basis on which environmental impacts of food-related LCAs are reported, known as the functional unit in LCA research (31-33), traditionally has been on a mass basis (i.e., per 100 g food) (31). The goals and scope of the research question at hand are critical when determining the appropriate functional unit (31). As shown by researchers in France (27), the functional unit selected can have implications for the results of a study and subsequently the interpretation of the findings. Consumption data from adults participating in the French national dietary survey were used to assess the carbon footprint (GHGe) of diets on the basis of their nutritional quality (13,27). GHGe were assigned to each of 391 representative foods in the French marketplace in accordance with international standards (i.e., LCA across the life cycle, farm-to-consumer, except for transport from retail to home). When the functional unit was determined on the basis of food weight (GHGe/100 g food), GHGe for dairy, mixed dishes, pork, poultry, eggs, and fish were 2- to 5-fold higher than for fruits and vegetables. However, when determined on the basis of energy density (CO2eq/100 kcal of food), GHGe for fruits and vegetables were 25% higher than for dairy products and similar to those of mixed dishes and pork, poultry, and eggs. When French diet patterns were compared on the basis of nutritional quality, after adjustment for energy intake higher-quality diets, which included more fruits and vegetables and fewer sweets and salted snacks, were associated with significantly higher GHGe than lower-quality diets (27). Diets with higher amounts of sweets and salted snacks were associated with lower GHGe; however, striving for such a dietary pattern would be inconsistent with dietary guidance to help consumers build healthy diets. In a related study, diets were classified as "low carbon," "high quality," or "more sustainable" (13). Similarly, higher nutritional quality diets were associated with higher diet-related GHGe (CO2eq/100 kcal). The comparability of studies that use different functional units for assessing diet-related GHGe is confounded [see Heller et al. (31) for further discussion]. Future research could benefit from guiding principles for the selection of the functional unit appropriate to the specific diet-related research objectives or, at a minimum, multiple functional unit bases should be evaluated simultaneously. Diet modeling by using linear programming methodology was used in the United Kingdom to optimize the nutritional adequacy of recommended diets while concurrently limiting diet-related GHGe (20,21) (Table 4). This approach was later used to model diets in France, Spain, and Sweden (22); and similar modeling was conducted by researchers in a New Zealand study (23). Diet modeling was conducted with and without acceptability constraints (e.g., foods commonly consumed and in reasonable amounts by the population; reasonable food costs; energy, macronutrients, and from 7 to 26 select micronutrients from country-specific recommended intakes). Without acceptability constraints, the United Kingdom diets could achieve 90% reductions in GHGe but with only 7 foods in the diet (21). Similar results were also found in the New Zealand study (23). When the United Kingdom linear programming model included acceptability constraints, a diet that met dietary recommendations and had 36% lower GHGe would be possible with 52 of 82 representative food groups and without eliminating meat or dairy or increasing the cost to the consumer. Similar results were obtained with the modeled diets in France, Spain, and Sweden (22). The New Zealand study modeled a total of 16 diets optimized for nutritional adequacy, cost-effectiveness, and limiting diet-related GHGe (23). Increasing diet variety and likely acceptability of the optimized diets tended toward higher costs in this model. When the modeled diets included meals more familiar to New Zealanders, for example, diet costs tended to be higher than the other optimized diets. Future research using this or similar approaches should also consider other aspects of environmental impacts (e.g., land use, water quality, food waste, and biodiversity), supply and pricing, including subsidies for farmers, and other social and economic aspects of sustainability. In the face of the anticipated global population growth, research on how different diet patterns may affect the capacity of regional land bases to meet the nutritional needs of populations is beginning to emerge. The diet-related research to date has focused largely on methodologic approaches to quantify the capacity of regional land bases to meet nutritional needs of those populations (34-42). Concurrently, increasing the productivity of agricultural systems continues to be a priority in both developed (2,43) and developing (44) regions of the world. One of the earliest studies on diet-related land capacity questions compared estimates of the land need to support Dutch habitual diet patterns with diets that meet only basic calorie needs to prevent starvation (basic; daily energy from wheat only) or that met energy and nutrient requirements (subsistence; select nutrient-dense foods) (34,35). Land requirements were reported as relative "land units," on the basis of Dutch per capita land use in 1990. To simply meet calorie needs to prevent frank starvation (largely from bread consumption), 23 land units would be needed; and to meet calorie and nutrient recommendations, a minimum of 67 land units would be needed. When Dutch habitual diets were examined, 23-143 "land units" were needed, reflecting the socially and culturally diverse eating patterns in The Netherlands. In a more recent study, habitual Dutch diets of a subset of the population (19- to 30-y-old women) served as the baseline to estimate the amount of land that would be needed under a scenario of replacing calories from dairy and meat with plant-based foods (36). Although up to 50% lower land requirements was projected, such a dietary shift was not considered realistic. Plant-based substitutes for dairy and meat are not commonly consumed by young Dutch women and therefore would require a huge shift in daily food choices by individuals across the population. Another approach developed by US researchers examined the capacity of the New York State land base to meet dietary recommendations [USDA Food Guide Pyramid (2000)http://198.102.218.57/dietaryguidelines/dga2000/document/frontcover.htm] for the in-state population (38-40). One study that examined 42 diets with different amounts of meat and eggs (0-340 g/d; 0-12 ounces/d) and calories from fat (20-45%/d) projected a 5-fold difference in acreage needs between diets with the least and most amount of fat and meat (38). Fruits, vegetables, and grains require high-quality land, whereas lower-quality land is suitable for forage crops, which are not consumed by humans. In New York State, land suitable for forage crops and dairy and meat production is more readily available than that for fruits, vegetables, and grains, making it theoretically possible that more people could be fed with modest amounts of meat in the diet than with a completely vegetarian diet. The concept of local food sheds, areas capable of supplying the food needs of a population from nearby sources, was also examined for urban areas of New York State (39,40). Many towns and cities in the state outside of New York City theoretically could have the majority of their food needs met from foods produced within short distances ("local foods"). Application of these scenarios to regions with different macro- and microclimates and land bases could help expand our understanding of the relations between diet, land requirements, and agricultural capacity of other regional food systems. In the United States, as in other developed countries, consumption of fruits, vegetables, dairy products, and whole grains falls short of national dietary recommendations. In 2006, Buzby, Wells, and Vocke (37) estimated the amount of land that would be needed if all Americans met the 2005Dietary Guidelines for Americansrecommendations. Projected improvements in agricultural productivity, which has a long history and continues to be a priority (2), were not reflected in these estimates. Meeting recommended intakes of fruits and vegetables would require more than a doubling of acreage, plus more imports. For grains, whole-grain consumption would need to increase substantially, but total grain consumption would need to decrease; thus, less total acreage would be needed. Meeting recommended intakes of dairy product consumption would mean substantially more milk produced annually. Concurrently, more acreage for feed grains and/or grazing would be needed depending on the type of dairy production system used. We recognize that eating patterns of populations generally do not change quickly; therefore, these estimates serve as a reference for future shifts in eating patterns and for projecting implications of increased production efficiencies of the agricultural land base. The potential for self-sufficiency in agricultural production in Austria through dietary changes and renewable energy crops was also examined with diet scenarios (18). Researchers examined implications of the population meeting the German Nutrition Society's dietary guidelines on land availability for food production, associated GHGe, and the potential for renewable energy from feed stocks (18). It was projected that if dietary recommendations for specific product groups (e.g., fruits) were met, lower meat consumption would lead to a decrease in livestock numbers, lower cumulative energy demand for agricultural production, lower GHGe, and a reduction in the amount of land needed. Furthermore, potentially more than half of the cumulative energy demand from agricultural production in Austria could be met through renewable energy crops. Advancing ways to harness renewable energy in animal agriculture holds promise for increasing production efficiencies and mitigating climate impacts of agricultural systems. In the United States, the Environmental Protection Agency's AgSTAR Program, for example, promotes the recovery and use of methane from animal manure to produce electricity, heat, or hot water (http://www.epa.gov/agstar/about-us/index.html). Studies from developing regions of China have used other approaches to assess diet-related impacts on land requirements. In one study in a developing rural area, Guyuan, habitual food consumption currently meets only basic energy needs for survival, with protein, especially animal protein, and fat intakes well below recommendations (41). It was projected that if Guyuan follows the same trends as the rest of China, higher incomes and meat consumption will increase the region's land requirements for food. In another study, an approach was developed to assess how food consumption patterns of rural Chinese residents relate to aggregated demands for land resources (42). The ecological footprint of the land, as defined in this study, consisted of land subdivided to energy land, fishing land, grassland, cropland, arable land for grain, and arable land for meat. This study assessed the ecological footprint between 1980 and 2006 and showed that higher productivity of the arable land over the past 2 decades in rural China has led to reduced pressure for resources to support regional food needs. This approach holds promise for assessing how food consumption patterns relate to aggregated demands for land resources in different ecosystems, particularly in developing countries. Both land and water are essential for the production of agricultural products. Although the concept of a water footprint has evolved as a standard in assessment of water consumption patterns (45,46), there is only a limited amount of research examining the impacts of different diets on regional water needs. The water footprint includes blue water, green water, and gray water (46). Blue water is the surface and groundwater (i.e., freshwater lakes, rivers, and aquifers), green water is rain water that does not run off or recharge the groundwater but is stored in the soil or temporarily stays on top of the soil or vegetation, and gray water is the volume of water that is required to dilute pollutants to such an extent that the quality of the water remains above agreed-upon water quality standards. The water footprint of production includes water use from domestic resources, whereas the water footprint of consumption (domestic consumption) includes the total volume of direct and indirect freshwater use from both domestic and foreign sources. It has been reported that one-fifth of the global water footprint is not used for domestic consumption but instead is exported (45). The water footprint of regions across the globe has been published; however, there is currently limited research assessing associations between diet patterns and water resources (19,47-49). Two studies from Europe examined the water footprint of consumption in relation to habitual diets: the German Nutrition Society's recommended diet, a theoretical vegetarian diet, and a "combination" diet (47,48). Another study from Italy compared the water footprint of consumption for habitual diets in Italy, Scandinavia, and North America with the Mediterranean diet (49). Habitual diets had the highest water footprint of consumption (47-49). The German-recommended diet had a lower water footprint of consumption, and the vegetarian diet had the lowest water footprint (47,48).The water footprint of agriculture is dependent on climate, irrigation and fertilization practices, and crop yields, with considerable variability in both developed and developing countries (45). More sustainable water use is expected from increased efficiency and changes in consumption patterns, such as replacing water-intense commodities with those requiring less water (45). Although most studies focused on a single indicator, 2 studies aggregated sets of indicators for a more comprehensive, albeit not complete, assessment of dietary impacts on environmental sustainability. One study examined the impacts of 4 dietary patterns (habitual Italian diet and nutritionally balanced omnivore, vegetarian, and vegan diets) and 2 farming practices (conventional or organic). Eleven environmental indicators were aggregated as natural resources (land use and fossil fuels), ecosystems quality (ecotoxicity, acidification, and eutrophication), and human health impacts (respiration, organic/inorganic compounds, carcinogenesis, climate change, ozone, and ionizing radiations) (50). These were further aggregated to a single score by using a point system. Directionally, environmental impacts of the habitual and different theoretical eating patterns and farming practices were as follows: normal Italian diet less than bold greater than greater than less than /bold greater than omnivore (conventional farming) less than bold greater than greater than less than /bold greater than vegetarian (conventional farming) greater than omnivore (organic farming) greater than vegetarian (organic farming) less than bold greater than greater than less than /bold greater than vegan (conventional farming) less than bold greater than greater than less than /bold greater than vegan (organic farming). Another study assessed environmental impacts of habitual eating patterns in the European Union (EU27), diets recommended by the WHO and the World Cancer Research Fund, and the Mediterranean diet (51,52). Eight impact categories (abiotic resource depletion, climate change, ozone depletion, human toxicity, ecotoxicity, photochemical oxidant formation, terrestrial acidification, freshwater eutrophication) were weighted and aggregated to a single environmental impact score. Compared with habitual eating patterns in Europe, the WHO diet had slightly less meat and more fish, fruits, and vegetables; the World Cancer Research Fund diet had less meat and similarly more fish, fruits, and vegetables; and the Mediterranean diet had less meat and less milk, significantly more fish, and more fruits and vegetables. This study projected that if the European population shifted to the recommended diets, there would be only a 1-2% reduction in the aggregated environmental impact score. Another level of analysis that accounted for potential impacts of shifts in eating patterns on agricultural trade balance between the EU27 and the rest of the world found that some of the limited environmental savings attributed to lower meat consumption would diminish. Although the concept of sustainable diets is not new, scientific research on how dietary patterns interface with ecosystems and the use of our planet's natural resources in ways that are environmentally, economically, socially, and culturally sustainable is only just emerging. Approaches to evaluate the sustainability of different dietary patterns vary widely, including differences in study designs and the specific environmental and other indicators examined. Inconsistencies in methods and assumptions to assess impact categories and the absence of national standard databases of LCA of foods in the marketplace hinder cross-study comparisons. Approximately half of the studies assessing environmental impacts of diet patterns identified in this review examined climate impact as GHGe. The carbon footprint of foods relative to other major categories of goods and services in developing countries is notably higher than in developed countries (53). In China and India, for example, food accounts for 35-47% of total GHGe for those countries, but in the United States, New Zealand, and Europe, food-related GHGe account for only 8-19% of the total in the individual countries. This may partially explain the relatively small differences across diets found in the studies assessing diet-related GHGe on a per capita basis relative to all goods and services (16,51,52). Transportation (private vehicles and land and air transportation services), by contrast, accounts for 19-34% of total GHGe in the United States, New Zealand, and Europe but only 8-9% of the total in China and India. In another study, the carbon footprint of US households in 28 cities was examined for 6 household sizes and 12 income brackets (54). GHGe reduction potentials from dietary shifts depend on household size and income, but mitigation potentials from transportation are large across all US household types. Considering that non-food-related GHGe account for greater than 80% of total emissions globally (53) and shifts in eating patterns across populations occur slowly, reduction potentials in GHGe in developed countries may be greater across other sectors, such as transportation, than by population-based shifts in eating patterns. Approaches to assess the capacity of regional and local land bases to feed urban and rural populations today and in the future are being developed and tested (36,38-40,42). Initial proof-of-principle studies have been published, but more research clearly is needed. Fewer studies have examined impacts of dietary patterns on water use and quality or other facets of environmental impacts. Only a few studies in the present review included economic implications of the various eating patterns studied. Remaining culturally sensitive to dietary preferences and considering cost constraints are real-world challenges that need considerably more research. The nutritional quality of dietary patterns is a fundamental requisite when assessing environmental impacts of diets under a framework of sustainable diets, as eloquently illustrated in studies from France (13,27). Under ideal conditions, the nutritional effects of diets on human health would be evaluated in a comparable unit or way similar to that for environmental impacts on human health, as suggested by Heller et al. (31). This could provide a further degree of integration of diet/nutrition and sustainability and a realistic way to assess the trade-offs that inevitably will need to be made on both personal and societal levels. Systematic frameworks have been proposed to address the broad context of the many linkages among the environmental, economic, and social dimensions of food systems that are critical to sustain the nutritional needs and health of the world's populations (10,11,55). A review of possible GHGe mitigation measures in agricultural production illustrates through several examples that the evaluation of associated trade-offs within the ecological, environmental, economic, institutional, and societal categories cannot only address the potential for unintended consequences but also lead to benefits in one or more of these categories (55). A comprehensive and solid science base is needed before dietary recommendations for sustainable diets can be developed. A holistic approach to cross-disciplinary research relative to the concept of sustainable diets can help identify research gaps, set research priorities, systematically examine trade-offs, and ultimately avoid unintended consequences to planetary and population health. Many studies point to the need for a far more complete assessment of the environmental, social, and economic impacts of foods and diets. Research needs cut across multiple fields, including agriculture, nutrition, animal science, environment, social sciences, and economics. A systems-based approach has been suggested (10,11,55); and advancing interdisciplinary research through multiple venues such as support of collaborative research programs, workshops, and scientific conferences will help to develop the much-needed solid information base. It is also important to recognize advances and continued progress in mitigating environmental impacts and optimizing use of natural resources in agricultural systems (43), including dairy systems (56), the private sector, and others. All food production incurs varying environmental impacts, and these need to be weighed against their role in providing nutritional and health benefits as part of overall dietary patterns. Whereas dietary guidelines across the globe, which are designed to help populations achieve healthy eating patterns, are based on a foundation of decades of nutrition science, studies examining interactions between diet and food choices, agricultural systems, the environment, and human health are only beginning to emerge. A strong scientific foundation through future research can inform future guidance on sustainable diets and avoid unintended consequences of well-intentioned dietary guidance based on currently limited information.