Tendon injuries to the human elbow occur frequently, especially in the overhead athlete due to the repetitive loads and forceful muscular activations inherent in throwing, hitting, serving, and spiking. None,NoneThe most common injuries in the athletic elbow include humeral epicondylitis, valgus extension overload, and ulnar collateral ligament injury. None,NoneThe initial upper extremity evaluation, including baseline radiographs and clinical testing of the entire upper extremity kinetic chain, forms the critical first step in early recognition and diagnosis of elbow injury and allows for the development of a comprehensive rehabilitation to restore function. One of the most common tendon injuries of the elbow is humeral epicondylitis,None,Nonereferred to as "tennis elbow," "golfer's elbow," and "thrower's elbow" by laypersons and the sports medicine literature. The repetitive overuse is particularly evident in the history of many athletic patients with elbow tendon injury. Classic epidemiological research on adult tennis players shows incidences ranging from 35% to 50%. None,None,None,None,NoneThis incidence is actually far greater than in elite-level junior tennis players (11%-12%). NoneAs early as 1873, Runge described humeral epicondylitis, or "tennis elbow," as it is more popularly known. NoneCyriax and Cyriax in 1936, listed 26 causes of tennis elbow,Nonewhile an extensive study by Goldie in 1964 reported hypervascularization of the extensor aponeurosis and increased free nerve endings in the subtendinous space. NoneLeadbetterNonelater described humeral epicondylitis as a degenerative time-dependent process including vascular, chemical, and cellular events that lead to a failure of the cell matrix healing response in human tendon. This description of tendon injury differs from earlier theories where an inflammatory response was considered a primary factor; hence, the termtendonitiswas used, as opposed to the term recommended by LeadbetterNoneand Nirschl and Sobel. NoneHumeral epicondylitis is an extra-articular tendinous injury characterized by excessive vascular granulation and an impaired healing response in the tendon, "angiofibroblastic hyperplasia." None,None,NoneIn a thorough histopathological analysis, specimens of injured tendon from areas of chronic overuse did not contain large numbers of lymphocytes, macrophages, and neutrophils. NoneInstead, tendinosis is a degenerative process characterized by large populations of fibroblasts, disorganized collagen, and vascular hyperplasia. NoneIt is not clear why tendinosis is painful, lacks inflammatory cells, and does not mature. The primary tendon in lateral humeral epicondylitis is the extensor carpi radialis brevis. None-None,NoneApproximately one-third of cases involve the tendon of the extensor communis. NoneThe extensor carpi radialis longus and extensor carpi ulnaris can be involved as well. The primary sites of medial humeral epicondylitis are the flexor carpi radialis, pronator teres, and flexor carpi ulnaris tendons. None-None,NoneThe incidence of lateral humeral epicondylitis is far greater than that of medial epicondylitis in recreational tennis players and in the leading arm (left arm in a right-handed golfer), while medial humeral epicondylitis is far more common in elite tennis players and throwing athletes due to the powerful loading of the flexor and pronator muscle tendon units during the valgus extension overload inherent in the acceleration phase of those overhead movement patterns. None-None,NoneThe trailing arm of the golfer (right arm in a right-handed golfer) is more likely to have medial symptoms than lateral. Mechanical loading of tendon tissue is anabolic by upregulating collagen gene expression and increasing synthesis of collagen proteins peaking 24 hours after exercise and remaining elevated for up to 70 to 80 hours. None,NoneHowever, exercise also degrades collagen proteins. This results in a net loss of collagen 24 to 36 hours after training, followed by a net gain in collagen. NoneThus, a restitution time interval between exercise bouts is critical for the tissue to adapt and avoid a net catabolic situation. The tissue's adaptive factors are linked to tenocytes, extracellular matrix, and nerve receptors. NoneRepetitive strain causes tenocytes to produce inflammatory molecules and engenders microrupture of collagen fibrils. NoneIncreased inflammatory mediators (eg, prostaglandin E2 [PGE2]) are found in tendons after repetitive mechanical loading. NoneIntratendinous injections of PGE2 cause intense degenerative changes, and peritendinous injections of PGE1 result in a histological pattern of tendinopathy. None,NoneToday, several studies confirm an inflammatory background in tendinopathy: granulation of capillary vessels and an inflammatory infiltrate of macrophages, mast cells, and B and T lymphocytes. None,NoneInflammatory cells activate a cascade of proinflammatory cytokines (eg, interleukin-18, -15, and -6) found in tendinopathy. NoneTendon cells and fibroblasts, subjected to repetitive mechanical stress in combination with proinflammatory cytokines and transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta) stimulation can transform into myofibroblasts. NoneMyofibroblasts are important for tendon healing, possibly for tissue adaptation. NoneAfter healing is completed and the mechanical stress is released on the myofibroblasts, these cells undergo programmed cell death (apoptosis). NoneIf this mechanism fails, the myofibroblasts will propagate a hyperproliferative process: fibrosis-a prominent feature of tendinopathy. NoneAnother factor that may cause fibroblast hyperproliferation is hypoxia. NoneThis upregulates matrix metalloproteinases, which alters the material properties of tendon. NoneHypoxia upregulates vascular endothelial growth factor, increasing microvessel ingrowth (angiogenesis), a major finding in tendinopathy. NoneAngiogenesis may cause pain since sclerotherapy relieves pain in tendinopathy. NoneHowever, blood vessels per se are not painful, but ingrowth of sensory nerve fibers in tendinopathic patients may be. None,None,NoneHealthy nonpainful tendons are almost aneuronal. None,NoneChronic painful tendons show ingrowth of sensory nerves from the paratenon with release of nociceptive substances. None,None,NoneRestricting pathological nerve ingrowth by denervation (eg, mini-invasive surgery or release of the paratenon) can relieve pain. NoneSensory nerve ingrowth in the tendon may be a reaction to repetitive loading and a response to injury. NoneIn normal tendon repair, sensory nerve ingrowth correlates with increased nociception, followed by autonomic nerve ingrowth, coinciding with decreased nociception and subsequent nerve retraction. None,NoneIn tendinopathy, the ingrown sensory nerves do not retract. NoneNeuronal dysregulation, characterized by aberrant sensory nerve sprouting, may reflect a failed healing response, increased pain signaling, and the hyperproliferation of tendinopathy. NoneIn addition to pain transmission, peripheral nerve fibers react to mechanical stimuli and release several chemical substances in healing and homeostasis. During prolonged release, these cause fibrosis. NoneEssential neuromediators are present in tendon. None,NoneTendinopathic tendons exhibit increased sensory neuropeptide substance P (SP), which plays a role in nociception and proinflammatory and trophic actions. None,None,None,NoneSP regulates vasodilation, plasma extravasation, and release of cytokines by binding to neurokinin 1 in tendon and is upregulated by loading. None,None,None,None,None,NoneSP stimulates proliferation of fibroblasts and endothelial cells and may transform fibroblasts into myofibroblasts by increasing the production of TGF-beta in fibroblasts. None,NoneUpregulation of SP may contribute to tendinosis-that is, fibrosis (tenocyte transformation, hypercellularity, and hypervascularization). The neurotransmitter glutamate and its receptor, NMDAR1, are in morphologically transformed tenocytes, endothelial and adventitial layers of neovessel walls, and sprouting nerve fibers. None,None,NoneAdaptation occurs in the overhead athlete's elbow in range of motion, laxity, and muscular compensation. Comparison to the contralateral nondominant extremity is often complicated by these asymmetric anatomic developments. Fifty percent of pitchers have a flexion contracture of the dominant elbow, with 30% demonstrating a cubitus valgus deformity. NoneElbow flexion contractures averaging 5 degrees were common in 40 healthy professional baseball pitchers. NoneDirectly related to elbow function was wrist flexibility, which was 3 degrees less on the dominant arm for extension and 3 degrees greater on the dominant side for flexion compared with the nondominant extremity. NoneIn 33 throwing athletes prior to the competitive season, the average loss of elbow extension was 7 degrees , and the average loss of flexion was 5.5 degrees . NoneSeveral studies have shown consistent alterations of shoulder rotation in the overhead athlete, with statistically greater dominant shoulder external rotation and less internal rotation in professional baseball pitchers. None,None,NoneDespite these differences in internal and external rotation, the total rotation (internal + external) between extremities remained equal such that any increases in external rotation were matched by decreases in internal rotation in this uninjured population. Elite-level tennis players had significantly less internal rotation and no significant difference in external rotation on the dominant arm, as well as an overall decrease in total rotation range of motion on the dominant arm of approximately 10 degrees . NoneCareful monitoring of glenohumeral range of motion is recommended for the athlete with an elbow injury. Decreases in dominant arm internal rotation (glenohumeral internal rotation deficits) often occur in throwing athletes with ulnar collateral ligament injury. NoneThe comprehensive evaluation of the throwing athlete must include measurement of shoulder internal and external rotation with 90 degrees of abduction, scapular stabilization, and management of internal rotation range of motion loss. NoneManual examination of the elbow for medial and lateral laxity can be challenging; humeral rotation and small increases in joint opening are often present with ulnar collateral ligament injury. A critical-level increase of 0.5 mm in medial elbow joint opening in elbows with ulnar collateral ligament injury has been suggested with stress radiography. NoneIncreases in medial joint laxity can increase stress to the medial muscle tendon units to compensate for medial ligamentous laxity. NoneProfessional throwing athletes have significantly greater wrist flexion and forearm pronation strength on the dominant arm (15%-35%) compared with the nondominant extremity with no difference in wrist extension or forearm supination strength between extremities. NoneIn professional baseball pitchers, there is 10% to 20% greater elbow flexion strength on the dominant arm, as well as 5% to 15% greater elbow extension strength. NoneA thorough evaluation of the athlete's elbow is necessary to rule out other concomitant injured structures and, most important, to identify the underlying cause of the tendon injury. Evaluation of the entire upper extremity kinetic chain with a particular focus on shoulder and scapular strength, motion, and stabilization, coupled with diagnostic imaging and clinical tests for the distal upper extremity, is needed (Figure 1). Overuse injuries in the elbow often occur with shoulder or scapular dysfunction. None,None,None,None,None,NoneExample of scapular pathology seen in an elite junior tennis player with medial elbow pain on clinical examination. Based on the healing response of the human tendon, several specific phases can be followed during nonoperative treatment of elbow tendinosis: protected function, total arm strength, and return to activity. Each plays a critical part in the comprehensive treatment of elbow tendinosis. During this first phase, care is taken to protect the injured muscle tendon unit from stress but not from function. Often, all sport activity must cease temporarily to allow the muscle tendon unit time to heal and to allow formal rehabilitation to progress. Immobilization can atrophy the musculature and negatively affect the upper extremity kinetic chain. None,NoneCessation of throwing and serving for medial-based humeral symptoms is indicated. Allowing batting and fielding activities in baseball or hitting double-handed backhands in tennis continues activity while minimizing stress to the injured area. Continued work or sports may slow the progression of resistive exercise and physical therapy. Modalities are very helpful during this period; however, agreement on a superior modality does not exist. None,None,NoneA meta-analysis of 185 studies on treatment of humeral epicondylitis showed glaring deficits in the scientific quality of the investigations, with no superior treatment approach. NoneIn a comprehensive review of the treatment for humeral epicondylitis, no significant difference was found with low-energy lasers, acupuncture, extracorporeal shockwave therapy, or steroid injection. NoneCortisone injection has been used during the pain-reduction phase of recalcitrant conditions. Traditional physical therapy and cortisone injection were compared in 70 patients with humeral epicondylitis. NoneThe cortisone injection produced initial relief in 91% of patients compared to 47% undergoing physical therapy. After 3 months, 51% of the cortisone injection group and only 5% in the physical therapy group had a return of primary symptoms. Similar findings were reported with Mills manipulation and cross-friction massage and corticosteroid injection in a prospective randomized controlled clinical trial in 106 patients with humeral epicondylitis. NoneAt 1 year, there were no differences between treatment groups. In a double-blind randomized controlled trial of autologous platelet-rich plasma in patients with humeral epicondylitis, 49% had a successful response (25% reduction in visual analog score and Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand score) in the cortisone group compared with 73% in the platelet-rich plasma group. NoneIn 199 patients with humeral epicondylitis treated with iontophoresis with dexamethasone, 52% improved, with only 33% of the placebo group reporting improvement after 2 days. NoneThere was no statistical difference in the overall improvement 1 month following treatment. Greater pain relief was seen with 6 treatments in a 10-day period. In a multicenter prospective randomized control study, extracorporeal shockwave therapy was ineffective in 272 patients with humeral epicondylitis. NoneSimilarly, low-intensity Nd:YAG laser irradiation at 7 points along the forearm, 3 times a week for 4 weeks, was ineffective. NoneA standardized modality or modality sequence has not been identified that is statistically more effective. Cryotherapy following increases in daily activity is recommended. None,NoneTherapeutic modalities and cortisone injection can only be one part of the treatment sequence; increasing evidence favors progressive resistive exercise. None,None,None,None,NoneThirty-eight patients with lateral humeral epicondylitis were randomly assigned to a contract-relax stretching or eccentric exercise treatment group. NoneSeventy-one percent reported full recovery in the eccentric exercise group, with 39% in the contract-relax stretching group. Eccentric exercise produced a significant reduction in pain and eliminated strength deficits in the wrist extensors and forearm supinators. NoneElastic flexible bar (Thera-Band FlexBar, Hygenic Corp, Akron, Ohio) produces an eccentric overload to wrist and forearm musculature in patients with lateral humeral epicondylitis. A twisting exercise to eccentrically load the elbow extensor musculature showed superior results to traditional rehabilitation (Figure 2). NoneAdaptation to medial humeral epicondylitis is also possible (Figure 3). The FlexBar preloads the wrist and finger musculature, followed by a slow eccentric contraction. Multiple sets of 15 repetitions are recommendedNonewith discomfort (visual analog scale levels 3-4). NoneTyler twist for lateral humeral epicondylitis includes eccentric loading of the wrist extensors moving from a position of wrist extension to wrist flexion. Tyler twist for medial humeral epicondylitis includes eccentric loading of the wrist flexors moving from a position of wrist flexion to wrist extension. Eighty-one patients with a 3-month history or greater (mean duration, 107 weeks) of chronic lateral elbow pain were randomly allocated to a concentric and eccentric exercise or control group for a 3-month period. NoneStarting with a water container (1 kg for women; 2 kg for men), wrist flexion and extension were increased by one-tenth when subjects performed 45 repetitions (3 sets of 15 repetitions). After 3 months of training, 72% of the exercise group had a 30% reduction of pain with the maximal voluntary muscle provocation test, as compared with 44% in the control group. Resistive exercise for humeral epicondylitis focuses on the principle that "proximal stability is needed to promote distal mobility." NoneInitially, focus is on the rotator cuff and scapular musculature (Table 1). None,None,NoneNone-None,None,NoneA low-resistance, high-repetition exercise format (ie, 3 sets of 15-20 repetitions) is followed to improve strength and local muscular endurance. NoneCuff weights allow rotator cuff and scapular exercises to be performed with the weight proximal to the elbow to minimize overload at the elbow and forearm. Proximal exercises used in rehabilitation of elbow tendon injury. Initially (for lateral elbow tendon injury) exercise of the distal extremity stresses the injured muscle-tendon unit last: wrist flexion and forearm pronation. Gradual addition of wrist extension and forearm supination, as well as radial and ulnar deviation exercises, are added as signs and symptoms allow. Initially, most patients tolerate the exercises better in slight elbow flexion with light weights. Eccentric exercise may have a greater benefit than the concentric portion. None,NoneMultiple sets of 15 to 20 repetitions are recommended to promote muscular endurance. Once the patient tolerates the most basic series of distal exercises, simultaneous contraction of the wrist and forearm musculature is added during elbow flexion/extension (ball dribbling [Bodyblade, Hymanson, Texas]; FlexBar oscillation [Thera-Band]; seated rowing). Additionally, closed kinetic chain exercises (quadruped rhythmic stabilization) are added to promote cocontraction and mimic functional positions with joint approximation. NoneGentle passive stretching and supine combined stretches are indicated to optimize the muscle tendon unit length to elongate the biarticular muscle tendon units of the elbow, forearm, and wrist using a combination of shoulder, elbow, wrist, and forearm positions. NoneWhen the patient tolerates the distal isotonic exercise progression pain-free (3-5 lb or medium elastic tubing or bands) and oscillatory-type exercises, he or she progresses to isokinetic and plyometric exercise (Figure 4). Contractile velocities ranging between 180 degrees and 300 degrees per second with 5 or 6 sets of 15 to 20 repetitions are used to foster local muscular enduranceNonein athletic patients with slower contractile velocities (120 degrees to 210 degrees per second). Plyometric wrist snaps (Figure 5) and wrist flips (Figure 6) train the active elbow for functional and sport-specific demands. NoneIsokinetic wrist extension/flexion exercise setup used during rehabilitation of humeral epicondylitis. Wrist snaps using a plyo ball to improve wrist and forearm strength. Wrist flips using a plyo ball to improve wrist and forearm strength. The return-to-activity phase is frequently ignored or cut short, resulting in serious consequences or reinjury (Table 2). Objective criteria for this stage are strength equal to the contralateral extremity and a pain-free range of motion. Nirschl tendonosis pain phases. Interval sport return programs utilize alternate days, gradual progressions of intensity, and repetitions of sport activities. For the interval tennis program, low-compression tennis balls decrease impact stress and increase the tolerance of activity (Figure 7). Supervision of the interval program allows for biomechanical evaluation and guards against overzealous intensity levels, a common mistake in well-intentioned, motivated patients. The alternate-day return program, with rest between sessions, enhances recovery and decreases reinjury. None,None,NoneExamples of low-compression tennis balls that can be used to decrease impact shock during the interval tennis program. These balls are available commercially. Inspection and modification of the patient's tennis racquet or golf clubs is important. Lowering the string tension and a softer string (coreless multifilament synthetic string or gut) are widely recommended for patients with upper extremity injuries. None,None,None,NoneGrip size is also very important, as muscular activity changes can alter handle or grip size. NoneProper grip size should correspond to the distance measured with a tape from the distal tip of the ring finger, along the radial border of the finger, to the proximal palmar crease or allow for the width of the contralateral fifth finger to be placed between the thenar eminence and the longest finger while gripping the racquetNone,None,None,None(Figure 8). A counterforce brace can decrease stress on the insertion of the flexor and extensor tendons during work or sport activity. NoneUse of the contralateral fifth digit to gauge proper grip size. The width of the fifth digit should fit between the longest finger and the thenar eminence in an optimally sized tennis racquet grip. The biological goals of nonoperative physiotherapy are neovascular enhancement and mature collagen production with associated improvement in muscular strength, endurance, and flexibility. Failure of a quality program may warrant surgical intervention. Most patients with elbow tendinosis respond to the nonoperative program. The principles of surgical intervention are total excision of the unhealthy pain producing angiofibroblastic tendinosis tissue, enhancement of vascular access to the surgical site, and preservation of normal tissue. NoneTechniques that fail to identify and excise tendinosis tissue and release normal tendons are not recommended. Failed surgery is almost always related to inadequate excision of tendinosis tissue with or without excessive release of normal tissue (eg, lateral epicondyle, extensor digitorum communis, and lateral ligaments). None,NoneThe mini-open techniques have reported success rates of 95% and 97% for medial and lateral tissue, respectively. NoneThe key pathological tissues are in the extensor carpi radialis brevis and extensor digitorum communis lateral, pronator teres and flexor carpi radialis medial, triceps posterior, and distal biceps anterior. None,NoneUlnar nerve neurapraxia is often associated (50%) with medial elbow tendinosis and may require decompression of the cubital tunnel. None,NoneIdentifying the specific tendon pathology and understanding the healing mechanism will help clinicians guide patients through the rehabilitation process.