Protein architecture is mediated by a suite of noncovalent interactions within and between polypeptide chains, including the hydrophobic effect, hydrogen bonding, Coulombic interactions, and van der Waals interactions. NoneWe have put forth ann- greater than pi* interaction as an additional means by which peptide bonds themselves interact. NoneIn thisn- greater than pi* interaction, a carbonyl oxygen donates lone pair (n) electron density into another carbonyl group (Figure1). Such donation occurs when the donor and acceptor form a short contact along the Burgi-Dunitz trajectory for nucleophilic addition. NoneThese interactions have been implicated in many systems, including small molecules,Nonepeptides,Noneproteins,Nonepeptoids,Noneand nucleic acids. None(A) Notion of a carbonyl-carbonyln- greater than pi* interaction in amide3. (B) Three-dimensional orbital rendering and (C) contour plot showing overlap ofnand pi* orbitals in the trans exo conformation of3. Images were rendered with NBOView 1.1. We and others have used a torsion balance in a proline model system to characterize energetic relationships of importance to peptide and protein structure (Figure2). None,None,None,None,None,None,NoneBoth the cis and trans isomers of theN-acetyl proline peptide bond are populated at room temperature and can be distinguished by NMR spectroscopy due to their slow interconversion. As then- greater than pi* interaction is only possible in the trans isomer, the ratio of isomers (Ktrans/cis) reports on the energy of the interaction. All previous studies employed esters as then- greater than pi* acceptor (1); because esters are more electrophilic than the amides found in proteins, those studies overestimated the strength ofn- greater than pi* interactions at 0.7 kcal/mol. None,NoneHence, we sought to determine the energy of a prototypicaln- greater than pi* interaction between two amides. Primary and secondary amides can both donate hydrogen bonds to the acetyl group, obscuring then- greater than pi* interaction in our analysis;Nonethus, we elected to examine the tertiary dimethyl amide (3). Compounds used to evaluaten- greater than pi* interactions in torsion balance analyses. In D2O, the value ofKtrans/cisfor amide3, like that for ester1, is greater than unity (Figure3A). We then employed density functional theory (DFT) calculations at the B3LYP/6-311+G(2d,p) level of theory with natural bond orbital (NBO) analysis to estimate the energy of then- greater than pi* interaction. NoneWe optimized the geometry of3in both the Cgamma-endo and Cgamma-exo puckers of its pyrrolidine ring (Figure4) and found the correspondingn- greater than pi* energies to be 0.14 and 0.53 kcal/mol, respectively. At room temperature, proline exists ?66% in the endo pucker and ?34% in the exo pucker. NoneBased on this ratio, we estimate the energy of then- greater than pi* interaction in3to beENone- greater than pi*= 0.27 kcal/mol (Figure3B). This interaction is weaker than that in1, which is consistent with the lower electrophilicity of the amide acceptor relative to the ester. Importantly, because the tertiary amide is less electrophilic and more stericially encumbered than the secondary amides common in proteins, the values we report here are likely tounderestimatethe energy of ann- greater than pi* interaction between most peptide bonds. Thus, we expect thatn- greater than pi* interactions in proteins contribute greater than =0.27 kcal/mol of stabilization per interaction. (A) Values ofKtrans/cisfor compounds1-6in D2O at 25 degrees C. (B) Energy ofn- greater than pi* interactions in1-6from second-order perturbation theory. (C) Overlap integrals between thenand pi* orbitals of3-6. (D) Reciprocal of the energy gap between thenand pi* orbitals of3-6. Data for esters1and2are from ref (9). Previously, we demonstrated that the substitution of an amide donor (i.e.,1) with a thioamide (2) increasesn- greater than pi* donation to an ester carbonyl (Figure3A). None,NoneThis increase arises from sulfur being a better electron-pair donor than its oxygen congener. This finding suggested to us that backbone thioamide substitution could enhance then- greater than pi* interaction between carbonyl groups and stabilize the folded structures of proteins. Still, the quality of a thioamide as ann- greater than pi* acceptor has been predicted only computationally. NoneHence, we synthesized4-6to evaluate thioamides as both donors and acceptors of then- greater than pi* interaction for the first time. Replacing the donor of3with the larger thioamide to yield4increased the value ofKtrans/cis, despite the added steric clash, confirming that sulfur is a strongern- greater than pi* donor than oxygen (Figure3A). Interestingly, whereas replacing the acceptor of3with a thioamide to yield5reducedKtrans/cis, replacing the acceptor of4with a thioamide to yield6led to an increase inKtrans/cis. Our NBO analyses show that replacing the acceptor with a thioamide reduces orbital overlap with the donor (Figure3C), providing a rational basis for the value ofKtrans/cisfor5being lower than that for3. NBO analysis of thioamides3and5revealed another pertinent quantum mechanical attribute. The pi* orbital of a thioamide is lower in energy than that of an amide, reducing the energy gap between donor and acceptor orbitals (Figure3D). From second-order perturbation theory, the energy released by the mixing of two orbitals is proportional to the reciprocal of the energy gap between those orbitals. Thus, though a thioamide acceptor overlaps less with ann- greater than pi* donor (Figure3C), a smaller energy gap between the donor and acceptor can produce more effective orbital mixing and a stronger interaction overall. The consequences are apparent in thioamide6, in which then- greater than pi* interaction is particularly strong at 0.88 kcal/mol (Figure3B), demonstrating that pairs of thioamides engage in significantly strongern- greater than pi* interactions than do pairs of analogous amides. As then- greater than pi* interaction populates the pi* orbital of the acceptor, it induces pyramidalization of the acceptor toward the donor (Figure4C). This distortion is detectable by X-ray diffraction analysis and can provide a signature ofn- greater than pi* interactions in small molecules and peptides. None,None,None,None,NoneHence, we conducted X-ray diffraction analysis of crystalline4-6to search for this signature of ann- greater than pi* interaction. Thioamide4crystallized as its cis isomer and therefore does not show ann- greater than pi* interaction, leaving the acceptor nearly planar (Table1). Thioamides5and6both crystallized as their trans isomer, with6crystallizing in both pyrrolidine ring puckers. In both5and6, the acceptor carbon is pyramidalized toward the donor significantly more than in4, denoting a strongern- greater than pi* interaction. In addition, pyramidalization of the acceptor in both conformations of6is greater than in5, which is consistent with the strongern- greater than pi*interaction in6. Moreover, the greater pyramidalization of the acceptor in6-exothan in6-endoconfirms that the exo ring pucker of proline promotes strongern- greater than pi* interactions. NoneIndeed, the pyramidalization in6-exois among the largest observed to date in this proline model system. None,NoneThese observations are also consistent with the pyramidalization in crystal structures of thioamide-containing peptides (see:Figure S1). (A) Cgamma-endo and (B) Cgamma-exo pyrrolidine ring pucker of compounds1-6. (C) Parameters that denote pyramidalization of carbonyl groups due ton- greater than pi* donation. From X-ray diffraction analysis of the crystalline compound. Parameters are defined in Figure4. These data further establish the quantum mechanical nature of intimate carbonyl-carbonyl interactions. Some have argued that these interactions are primarily dipolar in nature. NoneThe dipole moment of an amide is greater than that of an ester,Noneso if a dipolar interaction is dominant, replacing the ester of1with the amide in3should cause an increase inKtrans/cis, which is contrary to observation (Figure3A). Moreover, as a thioamide has a still larger dipole moment than an amide,Nonea dipolar origin would predict a larger value ofKtrans/cisin thioamide5than in amide3. That was not observed in our experiments. Finally, in a dipolar interaction, neither of the participating groups has a defined role; rather, they interact symmetrically. Thus, if intimate carbonyl interactions are dipolar in nature, then substituting either amide with a thioamide should have a comparable effect onKtrans/cis. The conformational preferences of4and5suggest otherwise: substituting then- greater than pi* donor amide with a thioamide increasesKtrans/cis, whereas replacing the acceptor decreasesKtrans/cis. These data affirm that a dipolar mechanism is insufficient to describe intimate interactions between carbonyl groups. Instead, the data are more consistent with an electronic donor-acceptor effect like then- greater than pi* interaction. Individualn- greater than pi* interactions between amides are relatively weak. In abundance, however, they could make a significant contribution to the conformational stability of a protein. We note another implication as well. Shifts in the equilibrium between alpha-helices and beta-sheets have been implicated in amyloid fibrillogenesis. NoneHydrogen bonding, which is operative in both alpha-helices and beta-sheets,Noneis unlikely to affect this equilibrium decisively. In contrast,n- greater than pi* interactions are common in alpha-helices but not beta-sheets,Noneand thus could play a critical role in the maintenance of protein homeostasis. In addition, our finding that then- greater than pi* interaction between two thioamides is 3-fold stronger than that between two amides (Figure3B) encourages efforts to exploit thioamides to enhance conformational stability in peptides and proteins. None,NoneFinally, as these interactions are not included in conventional force fields, we argue that accounting for then- greater than pi* interaction could improve the accuracy of computational investigations of proteins.