Over the past 15 years, catalytic C-H bond functionalisation has emerged as a rich and highly active field of research. NoneC-H functionalisation reactions proceedingviaPdII/IVcatalytic cycles are particularly prevalent due to their operational simplicity, wide scope, excellent functional group tolerance, and opportunities to access both C-C and C-heteroatom bond construction. NonePdII/IV-catalysed C-H functionalization reactions are generally proposed to proceedviacatalytic cycles exemplified by that shown in red inFig. 1. This involves three elementary steps: C-H activation at PdII, 2e-oxidation to PdIV(or a PdIIIdimer)Nonewith an appropriate stoichiometric oxidant (oxidant-X), and finally C-X bond-forming reductive elimination from the high valent palladium centre to release the product. Extensive research has established that the steps occur in this order for the vast majority of PdII/IV-catalysed C-H functionalisations. NoneHowever, several recent reports have suggested that C-H cleavage can also occur at PdIVcentres (Fig. 1, blue) and, further, that this process may be governed by different selectivity and reactivity principles than analogous transformations at PdII. This offers the exciting possibility for alternative catalytic cycles for Pd-catalysed C-H functionalisation, involving, for example, oxidation of PdIIto PdIV, C-H bond activation at PdIV, and reductive elimination to release the product and regenerate the PdIIcatalyst. Notably, in both cycles inFig. 1, additional and/or alternative steps are possible; however, the key distinguishing feature of the blue cycle, discussed herein, is that at least one C-H activation event occurs at PdIV. This mini review summarizes examples where arene C-H activation at a PdIVcentre is proposed in both catalytic transformations and in stoichiometric model systems. NoneFor some of these systems, clear experimental evidence demonstrates C-H activation at PdIVwhile for others, the role of C-H activation at PdIVis strongly suspected. Both synthetically useful catalytic cycles and mechanistic details are presented and discussed. NoneTo the best of our knowledge, the first report implicating a C-H activation reaction at PdIVinvolved the dimerization of 2-aryl pyridines. NoneIn this system, Pd(OAc)2catalyses the C-H/C-H oxidative coupling of a variety of substituted 2-aryl pyridines at room temperature using Oxone as the terminal oxidant. A representative example is the conversion of 2 equiv. of1into2(Fig. 2). Several experiments were conducted that suggest that this transformation involves two discrete C-H activation steps that have very different selectivities. For example, the unsymmetrically-substituted substrate3undergoes stoichiometric cyclometalation with PdII(OAc)2to afford a single isomeric product4viaselective cleavage of C-HA(Fig. 3a). When this complex is subjected to Oxone and substrate1under the standard conditions, a single isomer of the coupled product is formed (6a,Fig. 3c). In contrast, when the sequence is reversed (i.e. ,1is first cyclometalated at PdIIto form5(Fig. 3b), and this intermediate is subjected to analogous conditions with substrate3), a 5 : 1 mixture of the isomeric products6aand6bis produced (Fig. 3d). These results implicate two different C-H activation steps with different selectivities: (i) the initial cyclometalation of3at PdII(OAc)2( greater than 99 : 1 selectivity for activation of HA) and (ii) a subsequent C-H activation of3(5 : 1 selectivity for HAversusHB). A variety of additional experiments, including cross-over studies and reactivity studies of possible intermediates, implicated the mechanism shown inFig. 4. Here, an initial C-H activation at PdII(step (i)), is followed by oxidation of the resulting palladacycle intermediate A with Oxone to yield PdIVspecies B (step (ii)). The second C-H activation then occurs at this PdIVintermediate to yield C (step (iii)), which undergoes C-C bond-forming reductive elimination to complete the catalytic cycle (step (iv)). Subsequent work has taken advantage of proposed arene C-H activation reactions at PdIVto achieve synthetically useful catalytic transformations. In one elegant example, Michael demonstrated the PdII/IV-catalysed aminoarylation of terminal olefins with NFSI as the oxidant (Fig. 5). NoneThis reaction was discovered during an investigation of the Pd-catalysed diamination of7(Fig. 5a). When the solvent for this transformation was changed from EtOAc to toluene, the aminoarylation product8was formedviatoluene C-H activation. A variety of substituted arenes can also be used in this transformation, with substituents including Br, CH3, and CH3O. Furthermore, mono-substituted arenes react with extremely high selectivity at theparaposition (c.f. , products9-12ofFig. 5). This high selectivity is in marked contrast to most other Pd-catalysed functionalisations of mono-substituted arenes, which typically form mixtures of isomeric products. NoneAdditionally, Michael's aminoarylations proceed efficiently at room temperature, which is significantly milder than most PdII-catalysed C-H functionalizations of simple arenes. The authors propose that arene C-H activation occurs at a PdIVcentre and that this feature is responsible for the unusually high selectivity and reactivity. A number of experiments were conducted to gain further insights into the mechanism of this process. First, the electronic requirements of the C-H activation step were investigated using competition experiments between benzene and other arenes. These studies showed that benzene reacts faster (by a factor of ?2.5) than both anisole and bromobenzene. A competition between toluene and toluene-d8showed an intermolecular H/D competition isotope effect of 1.1 (14-d0/14-d7= 1.1,Fig. 6a). In contrast, the use of 1,3,5-trideuterobenzene as the substrate resulted in a much larger intramolecular H/D competition isotope effect of 4 (15-d3/15-d2= 4,Fig. 6b). In combination, these results implicate a 2-step C-H activation process, in which the two different steps occur with distinct selectivities. As shown inFig. 7, the authors propose that the two steps are pi-coordination of the arene to the PdIVcentre (which determines the intermolecular isotope effect, step (iii) inFig. 7) followed by C-H cleavage of the pi-coordinated substrate (which dictates the intramolecular isotope effect, step (iv) inFig. 7). Notably, C-H activation reactions at PdIIcentres generally show much higher intermolecular competition isotope effects (typically ranging from 2 to 6). NoneOn the basis of these (and additional) studies, a full catalytic cycle was proposed. As shown inFig. 7, the cycle begins with intramolecularanti-aminopalladation to produce alkyl PdIIintermediate D (step (i)). D then undergoes oxidation with NFSI to produce PdIVintermediate E (step (ii)) pi-coordination of the arene substrate to E to generate F (step (iii)) is followed by C-H cleavage (step (iv)) to afford aryl alkyl PdIVcomplex G. Finally, C-C bond-forming reductive elimination (step (v)) closes the catalytic cycle. The Yu group reported a related PdII/IV-catalysed C-H functionalization reaction involving the oxidative coupling of perfluorobenzamides with simple arenes using NFSI as the oxidant (Fig. 8). NoneSimilar to Michael's work, this transformation proceeds with very highparaselectivity, ranging from 12 : 1 with a bromo- or ethyl-substituent to "paraonly," with methoxy- or fluoro-substituents. The authors rationalize this unusually high selectivity based on a mechanism involving two sequential C-H activation events: ligand-directed C-H activation at PdIIfollowed by arene C-H activation at PdIV. They propose that the weakly coordinating perfluorobenzamide directs an initial C-H activation at PdII. The NFSI then oxidizes this palladacyclic intermediate to a PdIVfluoride complex, which promotespara-selective arene C-H activation. NoneSeveral studies were conducted to shed further light on the mechanism of this transformation. While substantial yields of oxidative coupled products were obtained with a number of different oxidants (e.g. , Selectfluor,N-fluoropyridinium K2S2O8), only F+oxidants afforded high levels ofpara-selectivity. This led the authors to propose that the presence of a fluoride ligand on the PdIVcenter is crucial for achievingpara-selective C-H activation. As shown inFig. 9, an isotope effect study revealed that the initial reaction rate is identical with toluene and toluene-d8as the arene substrate (kH/kD= 1). This result suggests that the C-H activation at PdIVis not the slow step of the catalytic cycle. Unlike the Michael system, no competition or intramolecular isotope effect studies were reported in this system, so the possible role of pi-coordination cannot be assessed from this report. NoneA number of groups have used naphthalene as a substrate in C-H arylation reactions that are believed to proceedviaC-H activation at PdIV. For example, in 2008, Inoue and coworkers demonstrated the PdCl2-catalysed C-H arylation of naphthalene with aryl stannanes. NoneThis reaction was selective for arylation at the alpha-position of naphthalene (alpha : beta ratio = 3.5 : 1,Fig. 10a) and afforded modest 40% yield. A variety of other substrates were evaluated and phenanthrene was found to afford the best yield (80%) as well as high selectivity for the 9-position (Fig. 10b). A mechanism involving naphthalene or phenanthrene C-H activation at PdIVwas proposed; however, minimal evidence is provided to support this pathway. More recently, our group demonstrated the C-H arylation of naphthalene using diaryliodonium salts as both the oxidant and aryl source (Fig. 11). NoneIn this system, the selectivity of C-H cleavage could be tuned through the appropriate selection of supporting ligand. Simple Pd salts, such as Pd(OAc)2and PdCl2, afforded modest yields and selectivities for the C-C coupled products (yields ranging from 12-24% and alpha : beta selectivities from 5 : 1 to 13 : 1). The yield and selectivity could be enhanced dramatically through the use of N-N chelating L type ligands, and the optimal diimine Pd catalyst (16inFig. 11) afforded 70% yield and greater than 70 : 1 selectivity for the alpha-arylated product. Notably, since this work, complementary beta selectivity has been achieved in the same transformation by employing a platinum catalyst. NoneRate studies of the Pd-catalyzed naphthalene arylation showed 1storder kinetics in [Ar2I]+and zero order dependence on [naphthalene]. Isotope effect studies were conducted using naphthalene and naphthalene-d8. The initial rate of the C-H arylation reaction was essentially identical with each of these two substrates (kH/kD= 1,Fig. 12b). Furthermore, a competition between naphthalene and naphthalene-d8afforded a product ratio corresponding to an H/D competition isotope effect of 1.08 (17-d0/17-d7= 1.08,Fig. 12a). This is very similar to the results obtained by Michael in analogous competition experiments (Fig. 6). Naphthalene was found to be the best substrate for this reaction, and arenes without an extended pi-system (e.g. , anisole, benzene, chlorobenzene, veratrole) afforded low yields and selectivities. On the basis of these investigations, the oxidation of the PdIIcatalyst by the aryliodonium salt was proposed to be the rate-determining step, and the C-H activation of naphthalene was proposed to occur at the resulting PdIVcentre. Additionally, a two-step C-H activation mechanism analogous to that put forth by Michael (Fig. 7) was proposed in this system. The first step is proposed to involve pi-coordination of the substrate to PdIV(a step that should be facilitated by the extended pi-system of naphthalene) followed by subsequent C-H cleavage at the PdIVcentre. Seayad recently described the selective C-H/C-H oxidative coupling of furans with arenes (Fig. 13). NoneIn this system, the site selectivity of furan C-H activation could be modulated based appropriate selection of the terminal oxidant. Using AgCO3as oxidant, the authors observed poorly selective activation of the furan (C-4/C-5 arylated products were formed in an ?1 : 1 ratio,Fig. 13a). Notably, Ag2CO3is unlikely to promote oxidation of PdIIto PdIV. In contrast, the use ofN-fluoropyridinium triflate (NFTP), an "F+" oxidant that is well known to promote the oxidation of PdIIto PdIV,Noneafforded greater than 20 : 1 C-5 selectivity in most cases. In the NFTP system, large isotope effect (ratio of products22-d0/22-d5= 4.8) was observed when the reaction was run as a competition between benzene and benzene-d6(Fig. 14b). In contrast, the competition between furan18and deuterated furan19-Noneresulted in a relatively small quasi isotope effect of 1.7 (the substrates are slightly different, so this is not a true isotope effect; however, the authors state that the rate of arylation is similar for the two substrates) (Fig. 14a). The authors propose a mechanism initiated by initial oxidation of ligated PdIIto PdIVby NFPT and subsequent C-H activation of the two substrates. An alternative possibility involving benzene activation at PdII, oxidation with NFPT and subsequent furan activation at PdIVis also possible, and perhaps more likely based on the related reactions described above. The examples described above summarize the current state of the art in catalytic transformations proposed to proceedviaC-H activation at PdIV. These examples show encouraging selectivity trends and demonstrate that valuable synthetic methods can be achieved with C-H activation at PdIVas a likely step. At this stage, most of these transformations have been discovered serendipitously rather than through reaction design. However, moving forward it would be important to rationally design catalytic sequences involving C-H activation at a PdIVcentre. A uniting feature of the transformations discussed above is the use of strong oxidants, with "F+" reagents, hypervalent iodine reagents, and inorganic peroxides being particularly common choices. In addition, many these transformations are believed to involve the generation of a PdII-C bond prior to oxidation of PdIIto PdIV. This likely serves to accelerate the oxidation event. Finally, most of the catalysts and intermediates in these transformations possess oxidatively stable ligands that are unlikely to participate in competing reductive elimination. All of these features should serve as key design considerations as new reactions are developed. Our group has developed organometallic model systems in order to directly observe and study this fundamental reaction. Such studies should ultimately assist in the rational design of new catalytic processes that incorporate this elementary step. The PdIVmodel complexes were carefully designed to accelerate C-H activation while slowing competing reductive elimination processes from PdIV. These complexes were designed so that the C-H activation would be intramolecular. For example, in complex24(Fig. 15), studied by Racowskiet al. ,Nonethe biphenyl ligand was incorporated to enable intramolecular C-H activation, which is typically more facile than the corresponding intermolecular reactions. In addition, the CF3ligand was included because aryl-CF3reductive elimination is known to be relatively slow from PdIV, particularly at low temperatures. NoneComplex24was generatedin situby the oxidation of (bpy)PdII(2-biphenyl) (CF3) complex23with PhICl2at -30 degrees C. Warming complex24to room temperature resulted in intramolecular activation of the 2-aryl substituent to form the cyclometalated PdIVproduct25. To our knowledge, this was the first direct observation of C-H activation at a PdIVcentre. In a follow up study, the related complex26(Fig. 16) was synthesizedviaoxidation of a PdIIprecursor with PhICl2. NoneThe tridentate tris(2-pyridyl)-methane ligand (Py3CH) was a key design feature in this study. This strongly coordinating tridentate ligand is well-known to stabilize octahedral PdIVspecies relative to analogues with bidentate nitrogen donors like bipyridine. NoneThus, it was anticipated that the Py3CH ligand would slow C-H activation and enable more detailed mechanistic investigations of this process. Indeed, the PdIVaryl complex26proved stable at room temperature and could be fully characterized by 1D and 2D NMR, HRMS, and X-ray crystallography. Complex26did not undergo C-H activation, even upon heating to 90 degrees C in CDCl3. Instead, C-Cl bond-forming reductive elimination was observed under these conditions. However, when one of the chloride ligands in26was exchanged for an acetate, the resulting intermediate27underwent clean cyclometalation at room temperature to yield28. This result suggests that C-H activation at PdIVin this system likely occursviaa concerted metalation-deprotonation mechanism, analogous to C-H activation at PdII. NoneWhen complex29(Fig. 17) was treated with acetate, a product ratio consistent with an H/D competition isotope effect of 7 was obtained. In contrast, the initial rate of C-H activation at30versus30-d2was essentially identical (kH/kD= 1). These results in combination with a variety of studies of the dynamic behaviour of complex26indicate that C-H cleavage is not the rate determining step in the C-H activation process in this system. The similarity between the KIE observed on this system to those observed in catalytic systems further supports the mechanisms proposed for the catalytic reactions described above. These two examples chronicle C-H activation at discrete and, in one case, isolable PdIVcomplexes. It is also noteworthy that C-H activation at the PdIVcentre can be facile at room temperature or below with bidentate ligands or in the presence of acetate ion. Future work on isolated palladium complexes may explore an intermolecular C-H activation event at PdIV. The catalytic functionalization of C-H bondsviahigh valent palladium is a powerful manifold for developing synthetically useful transformations. This mini-review has summarized experiments supporting the viability of C-H bond activation at PdIVand has described mechanistic studies of the C-H bond cleavage event. Synthetically useful catalytic cycles that utilize C-H activation at PdIVremain limited; however, there are great opportunities in this area due to the potential for unique selectivity in these transformations. Although the presently described work is mostly limited to catalytic C-H arylation sequences, as this method is more fully understood, one can anticipate its application to more diverse scaffolds and functionalizations.