The nose is a central structure of the face, so attempts to reconstruct ideal form and esthetics can be complicated. The majority of patients with cleft lip nose deformity require augmentation rhinoplasty for a more balanced nasal dorsum. Traditionally, autogenous cartilages from various sites are used to correct cleft lip nose deformity. However, sometimes results of corrective rhinoplasty using auricular or septal cartilages are unsatisfactory due to the weakness of the graft material. In that case, rib cartilage could be a good material of choice for corrective rhinoplasty for cleft lip nasal deformity [1]. However, the harvesting procedure leaves a cutaneous scar that is unacceptable, especially for a young female patient. So we need to find alternative surgical options to replace the autogenous rib cartilage. In 1998, a new biomaterial called PermacolTM (Tissue Science Laboratories plc, Aldershot, UK) was licensed in Europe for permanent implantation in human body. PermacolTM consists of acellular, cross-linked porcine dermal collagen that is resistant to degradation by collagenase. Furthermore, its structure is similar to that of human dermis. It had been widely used in general and gynecological surgery in the treatment of hernia [2,3] and otolaryngology surgery such as surgical closure of nasal septal perforation [4]. Recently it was described in facial contour augmentation surgery including esthetic augmentation rhinoplasty [5] and reconstruction of a post-traumatic nasal deformity [6]. The author augmented nasal dorsum after reconstruction of the lower third of the nose during corrective rhinoplasty in patients with cleft lip nasal deformity. In this report we describe three cases of rhinoplasty procedures using autogenous auricular cartilage and synthetic porcine dermal collagen with highlights of how to use it. A 17-year-old female patient with secondary deformity due to unilateral incomplete cleft lip and palate was referred to the Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Gangneung-Wonju National University Dental Hospital. Five years ago, she underwent autogenous bone graft on her cleft alveolus. During this time, her chief complaint was the deformed nose, so we decided upon corrective rhinoplasty and minor revision surgery on her upper vermilion. After taking standard rhinoplasty photograms, formal consent for the use of xenograft material was obtained. The operation was performed under general anesthesia with additional anesthetics consisting of 2% lidocaine and 1:100,000 epinephrine in the planned dissection area. Via an open rhinoplasty approach with intercartilaginous and stair-shaped transcolumellar incision (Fig. 1A), the lower lateral cartilage was dissected from surrounding soft tissues and prepared a subperiosteal pocket for the xenograft on nasal bone (Fig. 1B). After harvesting auricular cartilage from right ear (Fig. 1C), we applied it as a columellar strut (Fig. 1D) and cap graft (Fig. 1E) for a prominent nasal dome. The PermacolTM sheet comes ready to use and can be cut to the desired size easily. We inserted two layers (3 mm) of PermacolTM under the dorsal skin of the nose, and fixed it to the underlying cartilages with 4-0 polydioxanone (Fig. 1F). The upper portion of the PermacolTM was engaged in the prepared subperiosteal pocket. After closing the surgical wounds, we applied external nasal stent and tape for two weeks, as well as a nasal conformer for six months at night postoperatively. Esthetic results in visits at one month, six months, and one year were satisfactory for patients and surgeon (Fig. 2). The dorsal implant was intact and did not show any resorption or displacement. A 17-year-old male patient with secondary deformity due to unilateral complete cleft lip and palate was referred to our department. He had undergone several surgeries including distraction osteogenesis for collapsed maxilla, secondary alveolar bone grafting for cleft alveolus, and pharyngoplasty by the author. On this occasion (January 25, 2009), corrective rhinoplasty was performed. Under general anesthesia, open rhinoplasty was performed via an intercartilagenous incision, continuous with the transcolumellar incision on the line of previous scar (Fig. 3A, 3B). After harvesting auricular cartilage from right ear (Fig. 3C), we applied it as a columellar strut and gull-wing type graft (Fig. 3D) to strengthen nasal tip support. We then implanted two layers of PermacolTM (Fig. 3E), and fixed it to the grafted cartilages with monocryls (Fig. 3F). After layered sutures for wound closure, we applied an external nasal stent. Aesthetic results in follow-up visits were acceptable for the patient (Fig. 4). A 14-year-old male patient with secondary deformity due to bilateral cleft of primary palate presented to the department. His mother's chief complaint was the visible scar on upper vermilion and the compressed nose, so we decided to perform a cheilorhinoplasty. Under general anesthesia, open rhinoplasty was done via an intercartilagenous incision inside both nostrils and the incision for scar revision (Fig. 5A). After harvesting auricular cartilage from both ears, we applied it as a columellar strut and gull-wing type graft for prominent nasal dome (Fig. 5B, 5C). We then implanted two layers of PermacolTM in the form of an onlay graft, and fixed it to the grafted auricular cartilages with monocryl sutures (Fig. 5D, 5E). Good cosmetic results were obtained without any complications (Fig. 6). There is a vast number of surgical techniques and grafting materials for cleft lip nose deformity reconstruction. In general, autogenous tissues remain the gold standard for reconstructive surgery of cleft lip nose deformity. Especially for augmentation of the nasal dorsum, autogenous septal cartilage could be the material of choice [7]. However, autogenous grafting procedures require additional surgery and donor site morbidity, and sometimes graft material is limited. Thus maxillofacial plastic and reconstructive surgeons always need to prepare allogeneic or alloplastic materials as an alternative. Silicone [8], high-density porous polyethylene [9], expanded polytetrafluoroethylene [10], and human dermal collagen [11] are used as alloplastic materials for augmentation rhinoplasty, and have both advantages and disadvantages. PermacolTM can be a useful material for augmentation rhinoplasty because it is readily available in the required volume, it is easy to shape, and it seems to maintain the structural integrity of the nose. In this study, three patients underwent corrective rhinoplasty via external approach using autogenous auricular cartilage and PermacolTM composite grafting. The original dimension of the PermacolTM sheet used was 60*30*1.5 mm, and two layers of PermacolTM were inserted into the nasal dome with customized size for each patient. If layering is required, the material can be cut into separate sheets, creating edges rather than folding or rolling, probably due to possible colonization of microorganisms. The flexible sheet immediately conforms to anatomical shapes. At the nasal tip, the auricular cartilage was covered with a double layer of PermacolTM to form the ideal nasal contour. It is easy to shape and remains without migration or displacement. Afterwards, the author felt two layers of PermacolTM was aesthetically sufficient for the patient with thin nasal skin (case 1, 3), but deficient for the patient with thick facial soft tissues (case 2). Previous studies demonstrate that PermacolTM, when implanted in human body, is readily surrounded by host tissues such as fibroblasts and vascular endothelial cells. Finally, PermacolTM becomes incorporated by tissue ingrowth and neovascularization [12,13]. Hunteret al. [14] observed a PermacolTM explant 15 months post implantation, originally inserted for augmentation rhinoplasty. Macroscopically, PermacolTM was covered with a clear layer of fibrous tissue, characterized histologically by the irregular arrangement of collagen as well as the presence of some cells and elastin fibers. A specimen of PermacolTM ex vivo showed well organized bands of mature acellular collagen. They assumed PermacolTM was integrated or replaced with autogenous tissues. Similar results were reported in the rat model [15]. Furthermore, Hammondet al. [16] suggested that PermacolTM acted as a matrix into which autogenous tissue could grow. From those studies and our own limited experiences with three patients, the author think PermacolTM could be a safe and persistent graft material. Pitkinet al. [17] inserted fourty-five PermacolTM implants for augmentation rhinoplasty over a 4-year period, with only one case of postoperative implant removal. They concluded that PermacolTM seemed to be a biocompatible alternative to conventional grafting materials, with minimal morbidity. Compared to the removal rate of silicone [18] and the infection rate of Gore-Tex [19], Pitkin's clinical results are encouraging. Moreover, PermacolTM can be safely used in a contaminated field [20]. In our study, immediately after the operation, no patients complained of any foreign body sensations or discomfort at usual daily activities. No acute or chronic inflammatory or immunogenic complications were noted. Fuet al. [21] recommended long-term follow-up for the use of PermacolTM because some graft absorption was noted in their patient, who had undergone nasal profile augmentation. The author followed three patients for more than five years, but there was no sign of graft absorption. Hopkinset al. [22] also report successful long-term use of PermacolTM in rhinoplasty. In conclusion, we obtained pleasing results in reconstruction of cleft lip nose deformity with simple and safe surgical procedures. In our limited experience with three patients, the author concludes that the PermacolTM can be a reliable surgical option for patients with cleft lip nose deformity. Further studies with larger numbers of patients are required.