Higher hemoglobin A1c(HbA1c) has been associated with an increased risk of cardiovascular morbidity among individuals without diabetes (1-3). A potential pathway linking HbA1cand cardiovascular events involves the development and progression of subclinical atherosclerosis. The atherosclerotic process begins early in life (4), and noninvasive markers of subclinical atherosclerosis, such as coronary artery calcification (CAC), can be used to identify individuals earlier in the disease process who may have an increased risk of clinical events later in life. CAC has been shown to be a predictor of incident cardiovascular events (5-7), but the association of HbA1cwith CAC among individuals without diabetes is not clear. Prior studies of the association between HbA1cand CAC were cross-sectional and reported contrasting findings for individuals without diabetes (8-10). To date, the relation of HbA1cand CAC progression among individuals without diabetes has not been reported in the literature. The purpose of this study was to investigate the prospective association of HbA1cwith 5-year CAC progression among individuals without diabetes from the Coronary Artery Risk Development in Young Adults (CARDIA) Study. CARDIA is a prospective, community-based cohort study of young adults designed to investigate trends and determinants of cardiovascular disease risk in the U.S. A detailed overview of the study design, recruitment, and objectives has been previously published (11). Briefly, the baseline examination (1985-1986) included 5,115 non-Hispanic African American and white men and women aged 18-30 years from Birmingham, AL; Chicago, IL; Minneapolis, MN; and Oakland, CA. This analysis used data from in-person follow-up examinations at 20 (2005-2006) and 25 (2010-2011) years following the baseline examination. Participant retention rates were high, with 72% (n= 3,549) of surviving participants completing the year 20 examination (baseline for this analysis) and 72% (n= 3,498) of the surviving participants completing the year 25 examination (follow-up for this analysis). Centralized training and certification, standardized methods, and quality control measures were implemented to ensure high data quality for all examinations. The institutional review board at each participating site approved the protocol for each study examination, and participants provided written informed consent at each study examination. For our analysis, we excluded participants who did not attend both the year 20 and the year 25 examinations (n= 1,993), did not have HbA1cmeasured at the year 20 examination (n= 367), did not have CAC measured at the year 20 (n= 225) and year 25 (n= 149) examinations, or had diabetes (n = 283). Diabetes was defined as a fasting glucose greater than =126 mg/dL, 2-h postchallenge glucose greater than =200 mg/dL, HbA1c =6.5% (48 mmol/mol), or use of antihyperglycemic therapy. Additionally, 22 participants with an estimated glomerular filtration rate 30 mL/min/1.73 m2or an adjudicated myocardial infarction were excluded. The sample size for the analysis of any CAC progression and advanced CAC progression was 2,076 participants. For incident CAC, those with prevalent CAC at the year 20 examination were excluded, resulting in a sample size of 1,693 for that analysis. HbA1cwas measured from a whole-blood aliquot by ion-exchange high-performance liquid chromatography (Tosoh G7) at the University of Minnesota as part of the Young Adult Longitudinal Trends in Antioxidants ancillary study at the year 20 examination, baseline for this analysis. Data on age, sex, race, and smoking status were collected using standardized questionnaires. Height and weight were measured by certified technicians from participants wearing light clothing and no shoes and were used to calculate BMI in kg/m2. Systolic blood pressure (SBP) was measured following standardized protocols (12). After resting for 5 min in the seated position, blood pressure was measured three times at 1-min intervals using an appropriately sized cuff, with the average of the second and third measurements used to determine SBP. SBP was measured at year 20 using a standard automated blood pressure measurement monitor (Omron model HEM907XL) calibrated to the random zero sphygmomanometer that had been used at each earlier examination. Total cholesterol was measured enzymatically, and HDL cholesterol was determined by precipitation with dextran sulfate-magnesium chloride at the University of Washington (12). Electron beam computed tomography (CT; Chicago and Oakland field centers at year 20) or multidetector CT scanners (Birmingham and Minneapolis field centers at year 20 and all centers at year 25) were used to assess CAC by obtaining contiguous transverse images from the root of the aorta to the apex of the heart (13). The comparability of electron beam CT and multidetector CT has been demonstrated previously (14). Pregnant women and participants who exceeded the weight restriction for the scanner were ineligible. The CT scanning protocol included a hydroxyapatite calibration phantom to monitor image brightness and noise. A calcium score in Agatston units (15) was calculated for each calcified lesion, and the scores were summed across all lesions within a given artery and across all arteries (left anterior descending, left main, circumflex, and right coronary) to obtain the total calcium score. For the one participant who had coronary artery bypass graft surgery prior to the year 25 examination, only the native coronary arteries were scored for calcification. Three participants had had coronary stents at year 20 and four at year 25; stented areas were not scored, but 100 Agatston units was added to each person with any stents. All scans were read centrally with high interobserver (kappa = 0.89) and intraobserver (kappa = 0.95) agreement for the presence of CAC (13). CAC progression was assessed as1) incident CAC defined as an increase greater than 0 Agatston units among those without CAC at baseline (i.e., from 0 at year 20 to greater than 0 Agatston units at year 25),2) any CAC progression defined as an increase greater than 10 Agatston units (i.e., from 0 at year 20 to greater than 10 at year 25 or greater than 10 unit increase in CAC score at year 25 among those with CAC at year 20), and3) advanced CAC progression defined as a change greater than 100 Agatston units between years 20 and 25 (i.e., from 0 at year 20 to greater than 100 at year 25 or greater than 100 unit increase in CAC score at year 25 among those with CAC at year 20). The association of HbA1cwith CAC progression was evaluated using Poisson regression with robust variance estimation to obtain risk ratio (RR) and 95% CI (16). HbA1cwas evaluated as a continuous variable with a 1-unit increase defined as 1% (10.9 mmol/mol). Model 1 was unadjusted, model 2 was adjusted for sociodemographics (age, sex, race, education, and study field center), and model 3 included additional adjustments for cardiovascular risk factors (SBP, use of antihypertensive medications, total cholesterol, HDL cholesterol, current smoking, and BMI). Model 4 also included adjustment for the presence of baseline CAC for any CAC progression and advanced CAC progression analyses. Effect modification by race was investigated in fully adjusted models using interaction terms. Secondary analyses were carried out to evaluate the association of HbA1cwith CAC progression. First, an alternative definition of CAC progression, defined as a change greater than =2.5 mm3between square root-transformed volumetric scores, was used (17). Second, because individuals with prevalent CAC are more likely to experience CAC progression, the association of HbA1cwith the log-transformed quantity of CAC progression was also evaluated among individuals with CAC at the year 20 examination. Lastly, the association of HbA1cwith CAC progression was evaluated using HbA1cquartiles to assess possible nonlinear associations. The alpha-level used for all analyses was 0.05. All statistical analyses were conducted using SAS version 9.2 (SAS Institute, Cary, NC). Participant characteristics at baseline are presented inTable 1. The mean age of participants was 45.3 years, 40.9% were African American, and 57.3% were female. The mean HbA1cwas 5.3%, and 18.4% of participants had baseline CAC at the year 20 examination. Baseline characteristics of study participants without diabetes, the CARDIA study, 2005-2006Any CAC progression and advanced CAC progression were more likely to occur among individuals with CAC present at the year 20 examination (Fig. 1). Among participants with CAC at the year 20 examination, 69.7% experienced any CAC progression greater than 10 Agatston units, and 28.5% experienced advanced CAC progression greater than 100 Agatston units during the 5-year follow-up period. In contrast, among participants without CAC at the year 20 examination, 6.5% experienced any CAC progression, and 0.2% experienced advanced CAC progression. Overall, 12.9% of individuals without baseline CAC at the year 20 examination developed incident CAC greater than 0 Agatston units by the year 25 examination. Percentage of participants with CAC progression during the 5-year follow-up period, overall and by baseline CAC presence, in the CARDIA study. *Evaluated only among individuals without CAC at the year 20 examination. **P less than 0.001 comparing proportion with baseline CAC to no baseline CAC. The unadjusted and adjusted effect estimates for the association of HbA1cwith CAC progression are presented inTable 2. HbA1cwas associated with incident CAC after adjustment for sociodemographic factors (RR = 1.45; 95% CI 1.02, 2.06), but this association was attenuated after additional adjustment for cardiovascular risk factors (RR = 1.05; 95% CI 0.74, 1.49). Similarly, higher HbA1cwas associated with any CAC progression greater than 10 Agatston units after adjustment for age, sex, race, education, and study field center (RR = 1.51; 95% CI 1.16, 1.96), but this association was attenuated in the multivariable model (RR = 1.13; 95% CI 0.87, 1.47). Higher HbA1cwas associated with advanced CAC progression greater than 100 Agatston units after adjustment for sociodemographics (RR = 2.42; 95% CI 1.47, 3.99), and this association remained after additional adjustment for cardiovascular risk factors (RR = 1.78; 95% CI 1.08, 2.95) and baseline CAC (RR = 1.75; 95% CI 1.09, 2.83). RR and 95% CI evaluating the association of a 1-unit increase in HbA1cwith CAC progression over 5 years among individuals without diabetes in the CARDIA studyOne-unit increase in HbA1c= 1% (10.9 mmol/mol). Model 1, unadjusted; model 2, adjusted for age, race, sex, education, and study field center; model 3, adjusted for variables in model 2 plus SBP, antihypertensive medication use (yes/no), current smoking status (yes/no), total cholesterol, HDL cholesterol, and BMI; model 4, adjusted for variables in model 3 plus baseline CAC. *Evaluated only among individuals without CAC at the year 20 examination. Effect modification by race was evaluated but was not statistically significant for any of the CAC progression measures (interactionPvalues greater than 0.35). Analyses stratified by race are presented inSupplementary Table 1and show similar associations, although the CIs overlap and lack precision, particularly for advanced CAC progression. For the analysis of HbA1cwith CAC progression using the change in CAC volumetric score, 311 (15.0%) participants experienced CAC volume progression greater than =2.5 mm3, but the association of HbA1cwith CAC progression was attenuated and not statistically significant after adjustment for demographics, cardiovascular risk factors, and baseline CAC (RR = 1.31; 95% CI 0.97, 1.76). In another analysis focused solely on progression among individuals with CAC at baseline, HbA1cwas not associated with an increase in the log-transformed Agatston score (beta = 0.44; 95% CI -0.08, 0.96). Additionally, the association of HbA1cwith CAC progression was explored using HbA1cquartiles, and the findings were similar to the results for continuous HbA1cwhen comparing the highest HbA1cquartile with the lowest HbA1cquartile for incident CAC (RR = 1.06; 95% CI 0.72, 1.55), any CAC progression (RR = 1.14; 95% CI 0.85, 1.54), and advanced CAC progression (RR = 2.12; 95% CI 1.08, 4.19). In this prospective cohort study of individuals without diabetes, 18.2% of participants experienced CAC progression greater than 10 Agatston units over a 5-year follow-up period, and CAC progression was more common among those individuals with baseline CAC present compared with those without baseline CAC. Higher HbA1cwas associated with incident CAC and any CAC progression, but these associations were attenuated and not independent of other cardiovascular risk factors. However, higher HbA1cwas associated with advanced CAC progression greater than 100 Agatston units, and this association persisted after adjustment for cardiovascular risk factors. Prior studies investigated the cross-sectional association of HbA1cwith prevalent CAC among individuals without diabetes and reported conflicting results. No association between HbA1cand calcified plaque was reported in a study of middle-aged Korean adults (8). In contrast, another study of middle-aged Korean men and women participating in a health screening program (CAC prevalence = 10.9%) reported higher HbA1cwas associated with prevalent CAC (9). In the Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis, higher HbA1cwas also associated with prevalent CAC (10). However, this association was present for women and not men in that community-based study of older adults (mean age = 63.2 years) that had a high prevalence of CAC (53.5%). The differences in participant characteristics and CAC prevalence may have contributed to the contrasting findings reported for the association of HbA1cwith CAC prevalence. Additionally, the prior studies did not evaluate CAC progression as we did in our community-based study of middle-aged adults. In our study, HbA1cwas not associated with incident CAC or any CAC progression greater than 10 Agatston units after taking into account other established cardiovascular risk factors, whereas higher HbA1cwas independently associated with advanced CAC progression greater than 100 Agatston units. The physiologic pathway linking HbA1cand cardiovascular disease outcomes is not fully understood. A recent analysis of participants without diabetes from 73 prospective studies reported higher HbA1cwas associated with an increased risk of clinical cardiovascular events, although the addition of HbA1cto risk prediction models resulted in marginal improvements in cardiovascular disease risk assessment beyond traditional cardiovascular disease risk factors (18). As an integrated marker of glycemia, HbA1crepresents a general process of enhanced posttranslational glycation of many proteins that may relate differently to the various development stages of macrovascular disease for individuals without diabetes. Prior findings from studies of HbA1cand other markers of subclinical atherosclerosis have reported contrasting findings. Cross-sectional studies have reported positive associations of HbA1cwith carotid artery intima-media thickness (19-23) and echogenic carotid plaque (24). In contrast, no associations have been reported for HbA1cwith echolucent carotid plaque (24) and change in intima-media thickness or new plaque development over 5 years of follow-up (25). CAC represents a particular advanced stage in the atherosclerotic plaque (26), namely, metabolism incorporating calcium within an existing plaque, so its pathogenesis may differ from other markers of subclinical atherosclerosis. Our study did not find independent associations with incident CAC or any CAC progression greater than 10 Agatston units, but HbA1cwas independently associated with advanced CAC progression greater than 100 Agatston units. Because individuals with diabetes experience greater CAC progression than those without diabetes (27), it is possible that the association observed for those with advanced CAC progression greater than 100 Agatston units was reflective of the development of diabetes. However, HbA1cwas not independently associated with any of the CAC progression measures among individuals with diabetes at baseline in our study (data not shown), and HbA1cremained independently associated with advanced CAC progression greater than 100 Agatston units (RR = 1.80; 95% CI 1.06, 3.06) after multivariable adjustment and excluding 102 individuals who developed diabetes during the follow-up. These findings suggest HbA1cmay exhibit differential associations with CAC progression measures, indicating a complex association of HbA1cwith multiple markers of subclinical atherosclerosis and potentially cardiovascular events. This study has several potential limitations. HbA1cwas not measured until the year 20 examination, so participants who did not attend this examination and participants who did not have CT scans completed at the year 20 and 25 examinations were not included in these analyses. The retention of CARDIA participants is high, but participants who were excluded from this analysis differed from those who were included, and this may have affected our study's findings. Excluded participants were more likely to be younger, African American, and current or former smokers and have higher BMI and higher SBP, while no differences were noted for sex, education, lipids, and medication use when compared with participants included in this analysis. Additionally, HbA1cvalues may be affected by genetic factors and certain medical conditions such as anemia and liver disease (28,29). Excluding 55 individuals who self-reported a physician diagnosis of anemia or liver disease did not alter findings. HbA1creflects glycemic control over several months, but only a single baseline measure of HbA1cwas used in this analysis, and the association of HbA1cwith CAC progression may be better captured with the use of multiple HbA1cmeasurements. Currently, there are no standard guidelines for the assessment of CAC progression (30), so this study investigated several definitions of CAC progression, and the conclusions were the same using absolute change in Agatston units and change in volumetric score definitions for this relatively young population (ages 38-50 years when CAC was assessed at the year 20 examination). Additionally, although we used multiple absolute and relative definitions of CAC progression, interscan variability may have affected the CAC progression outcomes in our study. Repeat scans were performed at the year 20 examination to assess interscan variability. Interscan variability decreased as the degree of CAC increased, with the mean (SD) for the absolute differences in scans being 56.6 (53.5) for the Agatston score and 1.3 (1.4) for the volumetric score, respectively, for participants with an Agatston score greater than 100 at baseline. The majority of the participants did not have CAC at baseline, and the follow-up period was 5 years, so this study had limited power to assess associations with greater degrees of CAC progression. However, the investigation of CAC during this early stage of middle age is important given the established associations with future cardiovascular events. In summary, CAC progression was a common occurrence among middle-aged adults without diabetes in this study. Higher HbA1cwas associated with CAC progression over 5 years of follow-up, although it was only independently associated with advanced CAC progression greater than 100 Agatston units after taking into account cardiovascular risk factors. This suggests that the pathway linking HbA1cwith clinical cardiovascular events among individuals without diabetes may not be evidenced at the earlier stages of subclinical atherosclerosis development. More comprehensive elucidation of the relation of glycemia, subclinical atherosclerosis, and clinical cardiovascular events among individuals without diabetes is warranted.