Youth sports participation has evolved from child-driven, recreational free play for enjoyment to adult-driven, highly structured, deliberate practice devoted to sports-specific skill development. None,NoneEmphasis is placed on developing and attaining sufficient skill levels to excel at many levels of athletics. None,NoneThis evolution in youth sports may have developed as a result of society's increasing regard for successful athletes, who enjoy significant recognition and financial rewards for their achievements. Consequently, many children and adolescents participating in sports now aspire to achieve elite levels. None,NoneThe amount of training necessary to develop elite-level sports skills has long been debated. Ericsson et al defined the necessary components for expert skill acquisition in musicians, and these concepts have been extrapolated to sports. NoneTo achieve expertise, musicians must practice 10 000 hours over 10 years. This intense practice is more likely to be successful if begun during the early years of development. Lesser practice and a delayed start resulted in less expertise. In contrast, others believe that fewer hours are needed to achieve elite-level skills and that intense specialized training is more effective during later stages of development. NoneA survey of elite young athletes (Training of Young Athletes Study) found that parents were the strongest influence on the initiation of a sport (gymnastics, tennis, swimming, soccer) while coaches were the strongest influence on their decision to perform intense training. NoneSimilarly, a survey of 153 high school athletic directors suggested that coaches were the most powerful influence to specialize in a single sport. NoneThis may create a disconnect: initially, a parent introduces the child to the sport; successes follow; then the coach encourages specialized training to achieve higher level success. The parent may acknowledge and encourage increased participation, not want to interfere with the child-coach relationship, and/or assume that this path is necessary for continued success. If the child has an injury as a result of training, the medical provider may treat the injury but may not have enough information to provide appropriate training recommendations for injury prevention. Sports specialization is defined as intense, year-round training in a single sport with the exclusion of other sports. None,NoneVariations on this general theme exist, with disagreement on what volume of training constitutes "intense" and whether year-round participation or exclusion of all other sports is essential for classifying an athlete as specialized. Some advocate that a minimum volume of training is required to meet the definition,None,Nonewhile others define specialization as simply limiting participation to a single sport on a year-round basis, regardless of training volume. NoneEricsson et al proposed 3 stages in becoming a specialist or expert musician: (1) start at an early age, (2) specialize and increase participation, and (3) dedicate full-time commitment. NoneCote et al further characterizes the intense training as the ultimate purpose of improving performance ("deliberate practice") as opposed to enjoyment of the activity ("deliberate play"). NoneSoberlak and Cote developed a different approach when evaluating elite hockey players: sampling (ages 6-12 years), specializing (ages 13-15 years), and investment (ages 16+ years). NoneThe distinction of sports specialization should really be focused on children who commit exclusively to a sport during the early-to-middle elementary school years, since later specialization is very common and almost standard in today's society. NoneThese definitions exclude athletes who perform a large volume of intense training in a single sport throughout the year but still compete in others concomitantly and those who train intensely in a single sport during parts of the year with variable year-round participation. As a result, sports specialization may be better defined along a continuum. In an ongoing study, the rates of sports specialization in young athletes (8-18 years old) presenting to a pediatrician or family physician for sports physicals were compared with those presenting for an injury. NoneBased on questions about their sports participation, a sports specialization score was tabulated for each athlete. Preliminary data suggest that the most relevant question is whether they have quit other sports to focus on 1 sport. This factor accounted for 38% of the variance in the sport specialization score. NoneThe second-most relevant question (32% of the variance) was whether the child had spent more than 3 quarters of their training time in 1 sport. Year-round and/or out-of-state training and competition were also relevant in determining level of specialization. In the United States, participation in organized sport has increased from approximately 9% of children 6 years and younger in 1997 to 12% in 2008. NoneA majority (77.7%) of high school athletic directors reported an increasing trend in sports specialization. NoneFurther evidence for early sports specialization is the growing number of travel leagues at 7 or 8 years of ageNoneand an increase in young Olympic athletes. NoneRates of sports specialization appear to increase with age. A study of 519 US Tennis Association junior tennis players found that 70% began specializing at an average age of 10.4 years old. NoneSpecialization rate gradually increased after 14 years, with 95% of players by age 18 years. However, enjoyment and satisfaction ratings decreased in players older than 14 years old (P less than 0.01). The reality is that few athletes achieve the elite or professional level. NoneLess than 1% of young athletes 6 to 17 years of age achieve elite status in basketball, soccer, baseball, softball, or football. NoneThe data are similar for GermanyNoneand Australia. NoneThere is general agreement that the number of hours spent in deliberate practice and training positively correlates with level of achievement in both individual and team sports; whether this intense practice must begin during early childhood and to the exclusion of other sports is a matter of debate. There are relatively few data to validate these theories. Professional medical organizations have published position statements on sports specialization and intense training in young people but have limited data upon which to base their recommendations and thus rely on expert opinion. None,None,None,None,NoneThe best musicians spent over 10 000 hours practicing alone, while their less successful peers had accumulated 7000 hours or less, coinciding with critical periods of biological and cognitive development. Musicians began training around 5 years of age; those who began after age 5 years were unable to catch up. Research in athletes has not consistently demonstrated that early intense training is essential for attaining an elite level in all sports (Table 1). None,None,None,None,None,None,None,None,None,None,None,NoneData from these studies are limited by a subset of sports, small samples sizes, and retrospective design; few included athletes who began intense training before 12 years. Two studies demonstrated that accomplished elite athletes were more likely to initiate intense training in early and middle childhood; both were women's rhythmic gymnastics. In gymnastics, peak performance occurs before full maturation, requiring intense training before puberty. None,NoneEvidence for and against early sports specialization to achieve elite statusPlus sign (+) indicates "evidence for. "Begin intense training.Specialize in sport.Diversify early, specialize in sport. Canoeing/kayak, cycling, orienteering, rowing, sailing, skiing, swimming, track and field, triathalon, weight lifting. In contrast, elite athletes in other sports were more likely to initiate intense training later in adolescence. World-class athletes were more likely to start competing at a later age, competed in other sports, and were typically selected for a sport federation program at an older age than those at the national level. NoneA recent survey of 148 elite and 95 near-elite Danish athletes (mean age, 24.5 years; track and field, weightlifting, cycling, rowing, swimming, skiing) found that the elite group began intense training at a later age and spent fewer hours practicing its main sport up to the age of 15 years compared to the near-elite group.38 By 18 years of age, the 2 groups had accumulated a similar number of practice hours, but by 21 years, elites had accumulated more practice hours.38 Involvement in other sports was not different between the groups and did not predict success. These sports require a high physical and aerobic capacity and lower technical or tactical requirement relative to ball and performance sports (gymnasticsNoneand figure skatingNone). While some physiologic adaptations to aerobic training occur in childhood, they are much less pronounced than adaptations in adolescence. For most sports, early diversification is more likely to lead to success (Table 1). None,None,None,None,None,None,None,None,None,NoneA survey of 376 female Division 1 intercollegiate athletes found that the majority had their first organized sports experiences in other sports. NoneOnly 17% had previously participated exclusively in their current sport; the majority simultaneously participated in individual sports (swimming, track and field, diving, tennis, and golf). NoneEarly diversification provides the young athlete with valuable physical, cognitive, and psychosocial environments and promotes motivation. None,None,None,None,NoneAmong high-level athletes of basketball, netball, and field hockey, the greater the number of activities that the athletes experienced and practiced in their developing years (ages 0-12 years), the less sports-specific practice was necessary to acquire expertise in their sport. None,NoneThis is transfer of pattern recall skills from one sport to another, most pronounced during the early stages of involvement. NoneEarly diversification followed by specialization may lead to more enjoyment, fewer injuries, and longer participation, contributing to the chances of success. None,None,NoneEarly participation differences between elite youth soccer players who progressed to professional status at age 16 years and those who did not revealed that those who progressed had accumulated more hours per year in unstructured soccer activities between the ages of 6 and 12 years. There was no difference in soccer practice, soccer competition, or other sports in that time frame. NoneThis suggests that elites sought more unstructured soccer during free time. This is supported by data that show that enjoyment of the sport and intrinsic motivation predict attainment. None,None,NoneSuccessful elite tennis players often have good long-term relationships with the same coach, access to tennis courts, and less overall demands for success compared with age-matched controls. NoneThe risks of single-sport intense training include adverse psychological stress and premature withdrawal from competitive sport. Current data suggest that intense training and specialization may be independent risk factors. None,NoneThe risks of intense training in elite young athletes in the United Kingdom was relatively low (rates of injury less than 1/1000 hours of training) with few serious consequences. None,NoneTraining volumes were often less than 16 hours per week; lower than for other intensely trained athletes. None,NoneA 10-year follow-up suggests that injury incidence is significantly higher for athletes competing at an international level (87.5%) and a regional/country level (64.0%) compared with those competing at a national level (16.7%) or recreational level (47.1%). NoneHigher training volumes may increase risk for injury in a variety of sports. NoneIn 2721 high school athletes, increased exposure was the most important risk factor for injury. NoneThere was a linear relationship between exposure and risk of injury (odds ratio, 8.28), showing significantly elevated risk once training volume exceeded 16 hours per week (Figure 1). Cumulative match (or competition) exposure also carries a significant risk: medical withdrawals increased in national tennis players after playing greater than 5 matches per year in supernational tournaments. NonePlayers who specialized only in tennis were 1.5 times more likely to report an injury. NoneA 10-year prospective analysis of 481 youth baseball pitchers (9-14 years old) found that those who pitched more than 100 innings per year were 3.5 times more likely to be injured. NoneOthers have found a significantly increased risk (odds ratio, 5.05) for shoulder or elbow surgery if pitching more than 8 months per year. NoneRelationship of injury to exposure hours in high school athletes. NoneThe risk of injury from intense training and specialization may be affected by age, competitive level, growth rate, and pubertal maturation stage. Higher rates of injury were found in athletes older than 13 years of age and those at higher competitive levels. NonePeripubertal gymnasts are more likely injured during periods of rapid growth (Tanner stages 2 and 3). NoneFracture risk is also higher during peak height velocity. None,NoneEarly sports specialization may contribute to burnout and dropping out of sports (Table 1). None,None,None,None,None,None,None,None,None,NoneSwimmers who specialized early spent less time on the national team and retired earlier than athletes who specialized later. NoneMinor league ice hockey players (boys) that dropped out of the sport started off-ice training earlier and spent more time in off-ice training than those who continued to compete. NoneIn a retrospective 10-year review, 1 out of 5 of the most competitive elite athletes reported injury as the reason for quitting one's sport. NoneRhythmic gymnasts, those who specialized earlier and spent more hours training from age 4 to 16 years, rated their health lower and experienced less fun. NoneJunior tennis players who burned out early had less input in their training, higher perceived parental criticism and expectations, and lower levels of extrinsic motivation. NoneElite Russian swimmers who dropped out reported that the main reasons for leaving the sport were psychological fatigue, general health, and difficult loads. NoneSome degree of sports specialization is necessary to attain elite-level skill. None,None,None,None,NoneHowever, for most sports, intense training in a single sport to the exclusion of others should be delayed until late adolescence to optimize success while minimizing risk for injury and psychological stress. None,None,None,None,None,None,None,None,None,None