While genome-wide association studies (GWASs) are effective at projecting genetic variants to complex disease phenotype, establishing the corresponding mechanistic link remains difficult. This is especially true for single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in non-protein coding regions of the genome that may affect regulatory function in a manner that is only evident in a particular functional context (1). One such context may be a biological process determined by genes whose transcription is synchronized by common regulatory elements within their promoters (2,3). A SNP located in one of these regulatory elements may alter or disrupt this coordinated regulation, leading to a change in gene expression and subsequently phenotype. It may be possible to identify such a mechanism via a change to a transcription factor binding site (TFBS) by a candidate SNP; we demonstrate this strategy for a SNP affecting the diabetic nephropathy (DN)-associated bone morphogenetic protein (BMP)-signaling pathway. The approach allows us to generate testable hypotheses from GWAS candidates falling in promoter regions and has the potential to help understand the functional impact of genetic variants in DN and other complex genetic diseases. DN is the leading cause of end-stage renal disease in the U.S. (4), and ~20-40% of all patients with either type 1 diabetes (T1D) or type 2 diabetes (T2D) develop DN (5-7). DN has a significant heritability (8), providing the rationale for performing GWASs to discover genetic loci implicated in DN (9). Initial DN GWASs discovered candidate genetic loci for predisposition to DN for both T1D and T2D (8,10). However, these associations of a locus with DN do not explain how associated alleles affect the mechanism of disease. Unfortunately, this situation is typical of most GWAS of complex genetic disorders, while loci whose effects have been functionally confirmed are generally associated with Mendelian disorders. An example is the autosomal dominant disorder multiple osteochondromas, for which a SNP located in theEXT1promoter eliminates a TFBS and increases promoter activity (11). For complex diseases, any large-scale analysis involving luciferase assays, electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSAs), and ELISAs are simply not feasible for hundreds of disease-associated SNPs. Data-driven approaches including the one outlined in this manuscript are necessary to prioritize the number of testable hypotheses for further experimental validation. Establishing the functional context of a SNP is important in defining such hypotheses. Our group has previously used a functional context approach to identify proteins associated with the glomerular slit diaphragm in DN (12). In that work, a regulatory module detected in the promoters of a few known slit diaphragm genes predicted other slit diaphragm molecules after a genome-wide promoter search. Here, our integrative approach combines regulatory SNP prediction, transcriptional promoter modeling, and pathway analysis capable of decoding putative transcriptional pathomechanisms of DN (Fig. 1). We focus on the candidate gene FERM domain containing 3 (FRMD3) identified by a GWAS of the Genetics of Kidneys in Diabetes (GoKinD) study collection (13). In that study, the SNP rs1888747 showed the strongest risk association (P= 4.7 * 10-7; OR = 1.45) with DN within T1D subjects. Despite different study designs, this SNP also reached statistical significance level in a replication study of 1,305 participants of the Diabetes Control and Complications Trial/Epidemiology of Diabetes Interventions and Complications (EDIC) study, as well as in a subcohort of Japanese subjects with T2D (14). This polymorphism remained significantly associated with DN in a random-effects meta-analysis of genetic variants reproducibly associated with DN (15). Additionally, we have recently shown that rs1888747 is significantly associated with DN among 66 large T2D families from the Joslin T2D family collection (16). The SNP rs1888747 is located on chromosome 9q in the extended promoter region ofFRMD3. FRMD3has not previously been implicated in the pathogenesis of DN, T1D, or T2D. Overview of the analysis strategy (None-None) to identify the putative regulatory effect of GWAS candidate (None) onFRMD3regulation (None), linking the gene to transcriptional regulation of theBMPpathway (None-None) and DN and suggesting a hypothetical regulatory model (None). Here, we describe both our in silico approach and its use to derive the hypothesis that a DN risk allele bringsFRMD3under the control of a proposed transcriptional regulatory module and inhibits renal expression ofFRMD3. The approach not only detects a transcriptional regulatory pattern affected by the candidate SNP but also connects known DN-associated pathways to the GWAS-derived candidate gene, providing the testable model system for further insight into the pathophysiology of DN. We hypothesized that the SNP rs1888747, reported to be associated with DN by Pezzolesi et al. (13) and located in the proximity ofFRMD3, is a regulatory SNP that alters the transcription factor binding capabilities of theFRMD3proximal promoter region. We assumed that the binding site putatively affected by the SNP is part of a molecular TFBS framework involved in this transcriptional change, which should also be conserved in promoters of functionally connected (i.e., covarying) transcripts. Finding those transcripts might enable us to detect the framework by including the polymorphism in theFRMD3promoter and thus place the SNP into a DN-relevant functional context. We used comparative promoter analysis to determine common regulatory elements ofFRMD3and its coexpressed transcripts. Promoters of functionally linked transcripts are likely to contain conserved (nonrandom associated) TFBS frameworks. SNP-related TFBS alterations have the potential to integrate genomic features with transcriptional regulatory functions. A detailed overview of our study and strategy can be found inFig. 1. Renal biopsy samples were procured from 22 participants in a clinical trial (17) with an extended follow-up that provides an opportunity to examine the etiology of DN in T2D as well as the effect of treatment with losartan on the onset and progression of diabetic kidney disease. Renal biopsy specimens were processed and analyzed as previously described (12,18,19). Subjects' aggregate clinical and histological characteristics are summarized inSupplementary Table 2. We compared glomerularFRMD3expression levels as well as individual estimated glomerular filtration rate measurements of 22 Pima Indians with normal GFR with a cohort of seven T2D subjects with chronic kidney disease (CKD) stage 3 to assess whetherFRMD3gene expression would correlate with renal function. Statistical analysis comparing the two groups was done using GraphPad Prism 5 with a two-tailedttest (Mann-WhitneyUtest, 95% CI). P less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant. When genes are coregulated under various biological conditions, their corresponding -expression profiles may show relative similarity or coexpression (20). We identifiedFRMD3coexpressed transcripts by calculating Pearsonrcorrelation between the expression profiles ofFRMD3and all other genes expressed above background. These coexpressed, potentially coregulated transcripts were then analyzed to identify transcripts known to be functionally related using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis software (version 8.5; Ingenuity Systems, Redwood City, CA [http://www.ingenuity.com]). The software detects enriched canonical pathways in a given gene set. Default settings were applied. An unsupervised hierarchical clustering analysis of the 22 Pima Indians (T2D DN) using the expression levels of 581FRMD3coexpressed genes (includingFRMD3) was performed (MeV, version 4.5.1, Euclidean distance, average linkage method). The two main branches in the dendrogram showed 100% support (bootstrap,n= 1,000). They were further analyzed for differences in theirFRMD3expression and their ability to associate with clinical and histologic subgroups, as this would linkFRMD3coexpressed transcripts with a disease-associated phenotype. Renal function measures, iothalamate GFR (iGFR) (in milliliters per minute) measured by a urinary clearance method that used cold iothalamate (21), the albumin-to-creatinine ratio (ACR), and the fractional mesangial area were compared between the two clusters. DeltaACR/year and DeltaiGFR/year were calculated by subtracting the corresponding value from the time of enrollment into the study from the latest available value divided by the number of years of follow-up. Fractional mesangial area was determined as previously described (22). Statistical analysis comparing the two major cluster branches was done using GraphPad Prism 5 with a two-tailedttest (Mann-WhitneyUtest [95% CI]). P less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant. Promoter regions for the eightFRMD3coexpressedBMPpathway members were extracted (version 07/2009; ElDorado, Genomatix), and promoter modeling was performed to detect common transcriptional regulatory elements potentially influenced by the SNP of interest. For theFRMD3promoter, we extracted a sequence of +/-320 nucleotides (nt) around the SNP of interest, rs1888747. A sequence length of 320 nt was chosen to allow the detection of a four-element promoter module starting at the SNP position with an estimated average distance of 80 nt between the centers of two consecutive elements. The SNP rs1888747 is located at position 85345371 on chromosome 9 (Genome Build 36.3) in the extended promoter sequence ofFRMD3(1904 nt proximal to the first transcription start region). We determined potential TFBS generated or lost by the SNP rs1888747 (MatInspector, Genomatix) as described by Cartharius et al. (23). TheFRMD3promoter sequence was analyzed both with and without the risk allele. A promoter module is defined as a set of two or more TFBS of a defined order, orientation, and distance range acting together in a certain functional context (see Fessele et al. [2]). We searched for a common module among promoter sequences of a subset of the eightFRMD3coexpressedBMPpathway members and the SNP-altered sequence of theFRMD3promoter (FrameWorker, Genomatix). Variance and distance between the individual promoter elements were altered until a module with more than two elements was discovered. We required more than two elements to be identified in our search, since more complex modules have been shown to be associated with more specific biological function (24). In addition, the promoter module was required to occur in at least two of the eightFRMD3coexpressedBMPpathway members as well as in theFRMD3promoter sequence at the position of rs1888747. We evaluated the significance of the promoter module by searching a genome-wide human promoter database for additional genes whose promoters would also contain potential binding capabilities for the defined framework identified in the previous step (ModelInspector, Genomatix). For achievement of comparable preconditions, this search was conducted after adjustment for the promoter sequence of all genes in the promoter database (version 7/2009; ElDorado, Genomatix) (93,372 promoters) to the same sequence length where rs1888747 was found in the promoter ofFRMD3. AdditionalBMPpathway members identified by this approach were evaluated for their enrichment in comparison with the total number of additionally detected genes. EMSA was conducted to evaluate protein-binding differences of theFRMD3wild-type (WT) and SNP-altered sequence. While this method does not allow conclusions about the actual binding protein itself, it is an effective way for an initial assessment of regulatory capabilities of an SNP in a noncoding region. The following steps were taken:Glomerular isolation: glomeruli from five 3-month-old C57BL/6J mouse kidneys were isolated (25) with modifications in the nylon membranes used (100-um nylon sieve; Sefar, Briarcliff Manor, NY). Nuclear extracts: nuclear protein extracts from adult mouse kidneys and livers, glomeruli isolated from adult murine kidneys, and 293 cells were prepared as previously described (2). EMSA analysis: oligonucleotides corresponding to the WT DNA sequence 5'-ACAAGGCTCTGGGAAACCAACTGGCCATTGTCAACAATAATA-3' or to the SNP sequence 5'-ACAAGGCTCTGGGAAACCAAGTGGCCATTGTCAACAATAATA-3' and complimentary strands were annealed and end-labeled with32P-dCTP (26). Nuclear protein extracts were incubated in buffer with poly dIdC or poly dAdT and 10,000 cpm end-labeled oligonucleotide as previously described (26). For competition experiments, unlabeled DNA was added to the binding reactions at a 100-fold excess of the radiolabeled oligonucleotide. The DNA-protein complexes were resolved on 6% nondenaturing polyacrylamide gels in Tris-Borate-EDTA buffer at 120 V for 2.5 h. Gels were dried and exposed to XOMAT film (Eastman Kodak) overnight. The intensity of the DNA-protein complex was measured using the software ImageJ 1.44p (NIH,http://imagej.nih.gov/ij/). A pairedttest (GraphPad Prism 5) was used to assess the significance of the mean intensity in the SNP sequences compared with the WT sequence. To assess the functional relationship betweenFRMD3and DN, we related steady state mRNA levels to the available clinical outcome parameters. We foundFRMD3transcript levels decreased significantly with progression of DN (mean +/- SD 8.9 +/- 1.2 in DN with CKD stage 3 compared with 10.3 +/- 0.9 in DN with normal GFR [P less than 0.02]) (Fig. 2None). A:FRMD3is repressed with progression of DN. FRMD3gene expression comparing 22 Pima Indians with T2D and normal GFR with a cohort of 7 T2D with CKD stage 3. Data are displayed as means +/- SD. GlomerularFRMD3expression in early DN (Pima) 10.3 +/- 0.9 and in CKD3 DN 8.9 +/- 1.2. estimated glomerular filtration rate in early DN 104 +/- 19 mL/min/1.73 m2and in CKD stage 3 DN 53 +/- 33 mL/min/1.73 m2(P less than 0.002, Mann-WhitneyUtest, 95% CI). B:FRMD3coregulated genes segregate DN patients in defined subgroups. Cluster dendrogram of 581FRMD3-correlated genes (includingFRMD3) in a cohort of 22 Pima Indians with T2D DN. The two main branches (cluster 1 and cluster 2) of the dendrogram show 100% support and reflect distinct clinical groups (seeD). C:FRMD3and coregulatedBMPpathway members are repressed in cluster 1. FRMD3andBMPR2,CREB1, KRAS, MAP3K7, PRKAR2B, SMAD5,andXIAP(7 of 8BMPpathway members) are significantly (**P less than 0.008) downregulated in cluster 1 compared with cluster 2 (Mann-WhitneyUtest, two-tailed, 95% CI). Expression data are displayed as means +/- SD. GlomerularFRMD3expression cluster 1, 8.29 +/- 0.54; cluster 2, 9.67 +/- 0.41. D:FRMD3/BMPrepression is associated with increase of albuminuria. Clinical measures of DeltaACR/year comparing the two main cluster branches fromB. Data are displayed as means +/- SD. DeltaACR/year cluster 1, 212.4 +/- 227.9, is significantly (*P= 0.017) increased compared with DeltaACR/year in cluster 2, 3.7 +/- 8.7. (Mann-WhitneyUtest, two-tailed, 95% CI). E:FRMD3/BMPrepression is associated with increase of fractional mesangial area. Histologic measures of fractional mesangial area (%) comparing the two main cluster branches fromB. Data are displayed as means +/- SD. Mesangial expansion was significantly (*P= 0.04) increased in cluster 1 (30 +/- 14%) compared with cluster 2 (17 +/- 7%) (Mann-WhitneyUtest, two-tailed, 95% CI). AsFRMD3had no prior link to DN, we used a data-driven approach to establish a putative clinical and functional context forFRMD3in DN. Starting from a list of 17,589 transcripts expressed on the Affymetrix microarray chip, 16,956 passed the cutoff filter (median + 2 * SD of the 27 Poly-A Affymetrix negative controls' expression baseline [27]) and were tested for correlation withFRMD3. Transcriptional coregulation orchestrated by common upstream transcriptional regulatory elements (2) provided the rationale thatFRMD3-correlated transcripts (similar mRNA expression patterns) might be linked to regulatory pathways in DN, which in turn may help establish the link betweenFRMD3and the disease. We identified 581FRMD3coexpressed transcripts (|r| = 0.65, FDR = 0.02; for top 10 transcripts with the highest |r| value, seeSupplementary Table 1). The majority (518) of the 581FRMD3coexpressed transcripts were concordantly regulated withFRMD3, as were the top 10 (sorted by |r| value)FRMD3coexpressed transcripts. For 5 of those top 10 transcripts or close variants, an association with diabetes or cardiovascular or inflammatory diseases has been published (Supplementary Table 1), consistent with the relevance of this gene set to the pathophysiology of DN. Hierarchical clustering using the expression signatures ofFRMD3coexpressed transcripts detected two distinct clusters (Fig. 2NoneandNone). Patients contained in cluster 1 had a significantly (P= 0.017) higher DeltaACR/year of 212.4 +/- 227.9 compared with cluster 2 (DeltaACR/year of 3.7 +/- 8.7 [Fig. 2None]). Mesangial expansion, a key histologic feature of DN (22), was significantly (P= 0.04) increased in cluster 1 (30 +/- 14%) compared with cluster 2 (17 +/- 7%) (Fig. 2None). DeltaGFR showed a similar trend but missed statistical significance. Observation times were similar in both patient groups (cluster 1, 9.0 +/- 2.2 years; cluster 2, 9.5 +/- 0.9 years;P= 0.91). In cluster 1, with higher DeltaACR/year, the gene expression of seven out of the eightBMPpathway genes (BMPR2, CREB1, KRAS, MAP3K7, PRKAR2B, SMAD5, andXIAP) was lower than in cluster 2. This concordance of transcriptional regulation ofFRMD3andBMPpathway members with renal outcome measures points toward a common molecular mechanism responsible for the coregulation ofFRMD3and severalBMPpathway members. We determined the functional context ofFRMD3and its 581 coexpressed transcripts by mapping them to known canonical pathways. Among them, theBMPsignaling pathway was found to be the pathway with the strongest enrichment with eightBMPpathway members coexpressed withFRMD3(BMPR2, CREB1, KRAS, MAP3K7, PRKAR1B, PRKAR2B, SMAD5, andXIAP) (Fig. 3). This finding is consistent with previous publications attributing DN-protective properties to theBMPpathway (rev. in28,29) and indicates that the biological context defined forFRMD3and its coexpressed transcripts might indeed be relevant for DN. Functional association ofFRMD3-correlated genes. Top 10 pathways (Ingenuity Pathways Analysis; Ingenuity Systems) of 581FRMD3-correlated genes sorted by the ratio of members of the pathway amongFRMD3-correlated genes vs. total number of members of that pathway. P less than = 0.001 for all pathways. Junct., junction; med., mediated; Ox., oxidative; Pot., potentiation; Sign., signaling. In silico comparison of sequence variants with and without the risk allele identified a potential homeodomain factor (HOMF) TFBS covering the SNP position. This TFBS was not detected in the presence of the nonrisk allele in theFRMD3promoter (Fig. 1, step 2). An EMSA of oligonucleotides corresponding to the WT and SNP-altered sequence of glomerular extracts from C57Black6 mice supports these predictions: the sequence with the disease-associated SNP shows a greater than 4.7 times relative increase (intensity WT vs. SNP: 1 vs. 57, 15 vs. 92, and 31 vs. 145, respectively) in protein binding compared with the WT DNA sequence (Fig. 4). These results show that rs1888747 affects protein binding, suggesting the generation of a putative TFBS by that particular SNP. Increased binding of glomerular nuclear extracts to DN-associated genomic region. EMSA from oligonucleotides corresponding to the WT DNA sequence and SNP-altered sequence (SNP) of glomerular extracts from C57Black6 mice. The nonspecific competitor poly(dIdC) was used. Arrow indicates position of protein-bound oligos. With increasing amounts of protein used, a distinct binding signal can be detected in the SNP sequence but to a lesser amount in the WT-sequence as displayed in the Intensity Blot. Intensity of the DNA-protein complex inlane 2was set to 1.0. A pairedttest showed that the mean intensity was significantly higher in the SNP sequences compared with the WT sequence (*P= 0.04). prot., protein. After extraction of the proximal promoter sequences of the eightBMPgenes coexpressed withFRMD3, we identified promoter frameworks shared amongBMPgenes as well as theFRMD3promoter sequence with the risk allele. ForFRMD3and four of the eightFRMD3coexpressedBMPpathway members (XIAP, KRAS, PRKAR2B, and MAP3K7), we found a module with four TFBS (HOMF, BRNF [Brn POU domain factors], BRN5 [Brn-5 POU domain factors], and GATA [GATA binding factors]) where the SNP rs1888747 occurs in the first (HOMF) TFBS ofFRMD3(for details of the framework, seeFig. 1, step 6). This framework provides the molecular basis for a proposed coregulatory pattern ofFRMD3andBMPpathway members. A genome-wide search in a human promoter database (ModelInspector/ElDorado, Genomatix) identified an additional set of 18BMPpathway members containing the four TFBS modules in their promoters. An enrichment analysis showed that detecting the promoter module in 22 (18 newly identified plus 4 originalBMPpathway members) of the total 72BMPpathway genes as annotated by Ingenuity Pathway Analysis software achieved an enrichment score of 4.2 and a significantzscore of 7.6. These findings suggest that the four TFBS promoter modules could mediate the transcriptional coregulation ofBMPpathway members andFRMD3in the functional context of DN. Our results provide a rationale and an experimental framework to define a regulatory link betweenFRMD3and theBMPpathway in DN. With the emerging capabilities to capture the genetic and molecular underpinnings of diabetes complications, molecular-based disease definition can lead to individual risk assessments and selection of targeted therapies (30). Describing gene-environment interactions will be a critical step toward molecular disease definition. A series of studies currently aims to link genetic variation to diabetes complications (13,31-33). Genetic variants can affect the phenotype by directly altering the coding sequence of a gene, resulting in a qualitative change in the encoded protein. Alternatively, variants can alter regulatory regions in the genome, resulting in quantitative changes of the transcript. Research in monogenetic diseases has established a clear path forward to define the consequences of protein coding variants. Defining the consequences of regulatory variants on gene expression, particularly in complex diseases, is still in its infancy. The current study aims to provide one possible way forward to identify potential regulatory effects of DN-associated noncoding variants and their link to complex regulatory networks in DN. Regulatory network analysis starting from a putative causal SNP needs to be embedded in an in-depth analysis of the functional context of the affected gene. This context is required to reveal regulatory mechanisms represented by TFBS frameworks active in regulatory regions of the genes of interest. In general, regulatory SNPs can be inferred if a known or potential TFBS is directly affected by the polymorphism (34). However, since individual TFBS are often not sufficient for regulatory functions, their functional contributions can only be assessed in the appropriate regulatory context, i.e., the interaction with other TFBS (35). Disease-relevant pathways and transcriptional covariance can serve as selection criteria for genes belonging to that functional context. Regulatory links identified by this approach allow prediction of transcriptional alterations, which can be tested in the context of disease. This strategy presented in our study is applicable whenever a transcriptional change of the GWAS gene is observed and coregulated transcriptional networks can be identified. However, although this implies finding a group of coexpressed genes, the pathway association might not always be as clear-cut as in our case, which might result in testing multiple associated pathways with the strategy presented above. A direct hit of the SNP in a TFBS is an advantage, but proximity to a potential TFBS framework most likely would suffice to alter TFBS function. In case no such framework can be found with any associated pathway, alternative bioinformatics methods for the selection of genes of a similar functional context can be tested, including protein-protein interaction networks (36), phylogenetic conservation (12), or epigenetic/epigenomic approaches (37). With the increasing availability of genetic mapping of expression quantitative trait loci studies in DN cohorts, expression quantitative trait loci will be linked directly to the physical location of transcripts differentially expressed in DN and thereby support promoter modeling approaches as described by our example (38,39). The study presented here started from a worst-case scenario, as a testable hypothesis had to be developed for the role of a noncoding SNP in a gene without known function in DN. We followed a sequential strategy integrating multiple lines of genetic and genomic evidence for hypothesis generation (seeFig. 1for overview). First, the candidate SNP rs1888747 in the proximal promoter region ofFRMD3prompted us to search for the functional context of the TFBS framework covering the candidate SNP. Pathway analysis of coexpressed transcripts revealed a significant enrichment for theBMPpathway (40). BMPs are part of the transforming growth factor-beta superfamily (41) and have a well-established role in kidney development, cell growth, cell differentiation, chemotaxis, and apoptosis of various cell types (42). An imbalance ofBMP7agonists like kielin/chordin-like protein andBMP7antagonists like gremlin has been described in DN (29). Decreased expression ofBMP7and its agonists has been associated with increased profibrotic activity in animal models of DN (43), consistent with a protective effect ofBMPactivation in DN. Promoter modeling for theFRMD3promoter sequence as well as for eight coexpressed transcripts led to the discovery of aBMPpathway-specific TFBS framework that identified a total of 22BMPpathway members in a genome-wide promoter sequence search. Our results support the hypothesis of a functional connection of the SNP with reducedFRMD3expression, as the SNP-created binding site is located in a likely repressive promoter module. Since this module is shared between regulatory regions of 22 genes of theBMPpathway,BMPgenes could be suppressed by the same mechanism using the shared module. The risk allele generates the necessary binding sites of theBMPmodule in theFRMD3promoter and, as forBMPs, repressesFRMD3with deleterious impact on DN including inhibition of the protective effects of theBMPpathway. Interestingly, aBMP-focused candidate gene study by the GoKinD Study Group was not able to identify statistically significant DN-associated SNPs in the genesBMP2,BMP4, andBMP7(44). The above hypothesis establishes a trans-association of the DN-associated SNP linkingBMPgenes to the risk of DN viaFRMD3. Based on our findings, we developed a testable hypothesis for the functional impact of the SNP rs1888747 in DN. We suggest that our proposed TFBS framework is generally inhibitory in the context of renal gene expression and may act as a negative regulatory feedback loop to balanceBMPpathway action. A maximum parsimony of all known facts is consistent with the idea that oneFRMD3function is to aid in the activation ofBMPpathway gene expression, providing some counterbalance to the inhibitory effect of the TFBS framework defined forBMPs above. This is consistent with the observed higher expression ofBMPgenes in the absence of the risk allele. However, the risk allele bringsFRMD3under the control of the same negativeBMPfeedback loop, effectively abolishing the positive impact ofFRMD3onBMPexpression. As a result,BMP-mediated protective effects on renal tissue, and thus renal protection, are reduced in individuals with the polymorphism, which is consistent with the observed DN phenotype associated with the polymorphism. FRMD3andBMPpathway gene repression is correlated to the severity of the renal phenotype. Recent GWASs of T2D subjects also detected SNPs in theFRMD3gene region to be associated with diabetic retinopathy, possibly relating to a uniform connection ofFRMD3andBMPpathway members in diabetes end organ damage (45). The strength of this approach is its ability to predict functional connections based solely on regulatory networks as exemplified by significantly enriched transcriptional TFBS frameworks in the absence of direct protein-based evidence. We currently do not know how the connection betweenFRMD3andBMPpathway members is mediated. We found no evidence at the protein, RNA, or microRNA level. Therefore,FRMD3is thought to influence currently unknown regulatory intermediates. Even in this case, the model provides an explanation of how this SNP could bring the transcriptional regulation ofFRMD3under the same control as the coregulatedBMPgenes via the four TFBS regulatory module. While beyond the scope of our manuscript, functionality can now be established experimentally in vivo. The model approach introduced here provides insight into genomic variation and the mechanisms of transcriptional regulation and provides the basis for targeted experimental design. FRMD3appears to be a promising target for these experiments, as comparative genome mapping data also confirmedFRMD3as a nephropathy candidate gene in mice (46). The functional context proposed in this study could be experimentally validated by several approaches. Luciferase promoter reporter assays corresponding to WT and disease-associated alleles could be used to determine the functional impact of the rs1888747 SNP onFRMD3expression, and functional consequences ofFRMD3gene silencing/overexpression on the expression of BMP pathway members can be tested in vitro. The impact of the polymorphism in DN in vivo can be evaluated using mice transgenic for theFRMD3locus with and without the disease-associated polymorphism. As our data provide a functional link of BMP signaling pathway members to other potentially DN-associated pathways such as the IGF-1 and insulin receptor signaling pathway, results from these functional assays can be interpreted with regard to all pathways shown to be enriched amongFRMD3-correlated transcripts. Our work provides a paradigm of how functional genomics-based hypothesis generation can be implemented by a stepwise integration of regulatory SNP prediction, transcriptional promoter modeling, and pathway analysis. Our model approach provides a novel strategy to extend insight into the mechanisms of genomic variation and transcriptional regulation to regulatory networks informing subsequent experimental design. The general approach can be applied for different questions in the field of GWAS and transcriptomic data integration. The method is also suitable for the analysis of experimentally derived TFBS datasets, such as ChIP-Seq data or panels of in vivo protein-bound DNA elements, generated by genomic footprinting (47). Furthermore, information from chromatin histone modifications, potentially regulatory sequences, or phylogenetic footprinting studies can be linked to regulatory networks. In the context of DN, our work presents a novel starting point for hypothesis generation in molecular medicine in DN.