Since the first description of ischaemic PostC in anin vivodog model of ischaemia-reperfusion (I-R) injury [1], this clinically relevant cardioprotective modality has drawn considerable interest and been confirmed in many mammalian species including human being [2] and mice [3-7]. The PostC has potential clinical applicability, it does not require the same pre-treatment timing restraint for ischaemic pre-conditioning and it could be used during the routine interventional reperfusion procedure in the patients with acute myocardial infarction. Recent studies in patients treated with primary percutaneous coronary intervention have further underscored such utility of PostC as a cardioprotective adjunct therapy for acute myocardial infarction [8,9]. Type 2 diabetes is a rapidly growing health problem affecting millions of the world population. This pathology constitutes a major independent risk factor for heart attack and many other cardiovascular diseases. However, only a limited number of studies have examined the effect of pre-conditioning in diseased hearts [10-12]. Similarly, vast majority of the studies on PostC have been performed in healthy animals and human beings. Another issue is that the exact cellular and molecular mechanism of PostC is still incompletely understood. In particular, very little information is currently available concerning the effect of PostC on cardiac protein expression under the Type 2 diabetic patients condition. To address this important issue, our current study was designed to investigate the efficacy of PostC in the membrane-bound leptin receptor deficientdb/dbmice, which possess many characteristics of Type 2 diabetes including obesity, hyperglycaemia and hyperleptinaemia. In addition, we undertook series of advanced proteomic studies, in which the two-dimensional differential in-gel electrophoresis with three CyDye labelling and mass spectrometry were used to explore novel protein targets that are altered by PostC and/or Type 2 diabetes. Our goal was to gain new insights to answer the fundamental question concerning the utility of PostC in protecting heart against I-R injury in Type 2 diabetic patients and the potential defects caused by Type 2 diabetes in cardiac protein response to PostC. Age-matched (10-12 weeks) adult male C57BL/6J wild-type mice and homozygous leptin receptor-deficientdb/dbmice (B6.BKS(D)-LeprNone/J, stock number 000697) were purchased from The Jackson Laboratories (Bar Harbor, ME, USA). The animal experimental protocols were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of the Virginia Commonwealth University. All animal experiments were conducted under the guidelines on humane use and care of laboratory animals for biomedical research published by the National Institutes of Health (No. 85-23, Revised 1996). The mice were anaesthetized with pentobarbital sodium (70 mg/kg, i.p. ), intubated and ventilated with a positive-pressure ventilator (MiniVent(r) Type 845; Harvard Apparatus, Holliston, MA, USA). The tidal volume was set at 0.2 ml, and the respiratory rate was adjusted to 133 cycles/min. All surgical procedures were carried out under sterile conditions. A left thoracotomy was performed at the fourth intercostal space, and the heart was exposed by stripping the pericardium. The left anterior descending coronary artery was then identified and occluded for 30 min. by a 7.0 silk suture placed around a small tube to obstruct blood flow. At the end of ischaemic period the tube was removed to allow reperfusion, followed by air expulsion and chest wall closure. The body temperature was maintained precisely at 37 degrees C using a self-regulated mouse heating pad (catalogue no. NC9478922; Fisher Scientific, Pittsburg, PA, USA) throughout the entire surgical and post-operative periods. For the PostC groups, the hearts underwent six cycles of 10 sec. of reperfusion and 10 sec. of re-occlusion at the onset of reperfusion, a protocol of PostC that has been used in previous mouse studies [5,7,13]. After 24 hrs of reperfusion, the mice were re-anaesthetized and chest-opened to harvest the hearts, which were immediately cannulatedviaaortic opening and infused with saline for washing out the blood and then with 2 ml of 10% Evans blue dye for determining the area at risk and frozen under -20 degrees C. Each of the hearts was sectioned into six to eight transverse slices (?1 mm thickness) and stained with 10% triphenyl tetrazolium chloride (TTC) for 30 min. at room temperature. The TTC-stained heart slices were then fixed with 10% formalin until measurement. The areas of infarct zone, the risk area and the entire left ventricle were determined by computer morphometric system with BIOQUANT(r) imaging software (BIOQUANT Image Analysis Corp, Nashville, TN, USA). Infarct size was expressed as percentage of the risk area. Upon sacrificing each of the mice, a drop of blood sample was taken to measure individual blood glucose level using a Contour(r) blood glucose meter (Bayer HealthCare LLC, Mishawaka, IN, USA). In a parallel series of experiments, the heart samples were collected following the above-mentioned I-R protocol in the four experimental groups and immediately frozen under liquid nitrogen for proteomic analysis. The two-dimensional differential in-gel electrophoresis (2D-DIGE) and mass spectrometry protein identification were performed by Applied Biomics, Inc. (Hayward, CA, USA) following established protocols and the methodology, which were previously described in details [14]. Each gel was scanned immediately following SDS-PAGE using Typhoon Trio scanner (Amersham, Piscataway, NJ, USA). The scanned images were then analysed by Image QuantTL software (GE-Healthcare, Piscataway, NJ, USA), and then subjected to in-gel analysis and cross-gel analysis using DeCyder software version 6.5 (GE Healthcare). The change in ratio of differential protein expression was obtained from in-gel DeCyder software analysis. Quantitative comparisons were then made between two individual samples for each of the three possible combinations. In bothWTanddb/dbheart samples, the pair-wise volume ratios (i.e. ControlversusI-R, ControlversusI-R + PostC, and I-RversusI-R + PostC) were calculated for each protein spot and used to determine relative protein expression. To simplify the presentation of the most relevant data, only the ratios of comparisons between I-R and I-R + PostC are presented for bothWTanddb/dbhearts. The selected spots were picked up by Ettan Spot Picker (GE-Healthcare) following the DeCyder software analysis and spot picking design. The selected protein spots were subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion, peptides extraction, desalting and followed by MALDI-TOF/TOF to determine the protein identity. In brief, mass spectra (MS) of the peptides in each sample were obtained using Applied Biosystems Proteomics Analyzer. Ten to 20 of the most abundant peptides in each sample were further subjected to fragmentation and tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) analysis. Protein identification was based on peptide fingerprint mass mapping (using MS spectra) and peptide fragmentation mapping (using MS/MS spectra). Combined MS and MS/MS spectra were submitted for database search using GPS Explorer software equipped with the MASCOT search engine to identify proteins from primary sequence databases. The morphometric and physiological parameters (i.e. body weight, blood glucose and myocardial infarct size) are presented as mean +/- S.E., which were analysed using one-way ANOVA followed by Student-Newman-Keulspost-hoctest for pair-wise comparison among the four experimental groups. The body weight was higher in thedb/dbmice as compared with theWTmice, with or without PostC (Fig. 1A;P less than 0.01). Similar differences were also found in the blood glucose level (P less than 0.05WT versus db/db;Fig. 1B). Thein vivosurgical protocol of I-R was performed in total of 20WTmice and 42db/dbmice. The post-operative survival rates for each of the four experimental groups are: 72%WT, 77%WT+PostC, 35%db/dband 31%db/db+PostC. Approximately 70-80% of the mortality occurred between 10 min. and 1 hr after the beginning of reperfusion. The reperfusion-triggered severe ventricular arrhythmia and cardiac failure were the most likely causes of death. The mice surviving from the surgical procedure were randomly divided for either infarct size measurement or proteomic studies. Changes in body weight (A), blood glucose level (B) and myocardial infarct size (C) followingin vivoregional ischaemia-reperfusion and ischaemic postconditioning (PostC) inWTand Type 2 diabeticdb/dbmice. WT-C57/BL6J wild-type control group. *P less than 0.05versus WTgroup;#P less than 0.05versus WT+PostCgroup. The area at risk (% of left ventricle, mean +/- S.E.) was similar among all four groups, that is 43.2 +/- 3.1 (WT), 41.2 +/- 3.3 (WT+PostC), 41.7+/-1.3 (db/db) and 40.4+/-1.8 (db/db+PostC;P greater than 0.05). Myocardial infarct size was significantly higher indb/dbgroup as compared withWTgroup (P less than 0.05). PostC significantly reduced infarct size in the C57BL wild-type mice (P less than 0.05,WT versus WT-PostC;Fig. 1C). In contrast, PostC failed to limit infarct size in thedb/dbmice (db/db versus db/db-PostC,P greater than 0.05). A set of representative TTC-stained transverse heart sections from each of the four experimental groups is shown inFig. 1C. Following 2D-DIGE, in-gel analysis was performed on the scanned images from each gel to determine the protein differential expression. Quantitative pair-wise comparisons of the protein volume ratios for each protein spot were made among the three treatment conditions (i.e. Control versus I-R,Control versus I-R+PostCandI-R versus I-R+PostC) in eitherWTordb/dbmouse strains. Fig. 2Ashows an overlay image for in-gel comparison between the heart samples from theWTmice subjected to I-R (labelled in green dye) and toI-R+PostC(labelled in red dye). Similarly,Fig. 1Bdepicts an overlay image for in-gel comparison between the heart samples from thedb/dbmice subjected to I-R (labelled in green dye) andI-R+PostC(labelled in red dye) groups. The numbered circles represent the protein spots that are differentiable among any pair of the treatment conditions in terms of abundance in protein expression using the 1.5 cut-off ratio. Scanned images of the 2-D gels with three CyDye labelling. (A) Overlay image for in-gel comparison between the C57BL/6J wild-type mouse hearts from the ischaemia-reperfusion alone group (I-R; labelled in green dye) and the PostC-treated group (I-R+PostC; labelled in red dye). (B) Overlay image for in-gel comparison between thedb/dbdiabetic mouse hearts from theI-Rgroup (labelled in green dye) and theI-R+PostCgroup (labelled in red dye). The circled and numbered protein spots with a cut-off ratio of 1.5 for alteration in protein expression between the two treatment conditions are subsequently isolated from the gels and identified by MALDI TOF/TOF mass spectroscopy. As summarized inTable 1, four protein spots were significantly up-regulated (i.e. greater than 1.5 fold) by PostC and six other protein spots were down-regulated by PostC in theWThearts. Conversely, PostC in thedb/dbhearts led to increased expression in five proteins spots and reduction in 16 other protein spots. These spots were subsequently picked for protein identification using MALDI TOF/TOF tandem mass spectrometry. Ischaemic post-conditioning-induced modification of protein expression in the C57BL/6J wild-type anddb/dbdiabetic miceNote:Data listed according to high-to-low fold change ratio of protein abundance between I/R+Postconditioning and I/R alone. The cut-off ratio of change was 1.50. MW: molecular weight; I/R: ischaemia/reperfusion. To understand the functional significance of PostC-modified proteins in the heart, we grouped the positively identified proteins according to their known main biological function under the following six categories (Table 1). The first group is a mitochondrial antioxidant enzyme-peroxiredoxin 5, which was enhanced by PostC in bothWTanddb/dbhearts. The second group composed of four cytoskeletal/contractile proteins, in which one protein-myosin regulatory light chain 2, cardiac isoform was up-regulated and two proteins (fibrinogen alpha and beta) were down-regulated by PostC in bothWTanddb/dbhearts. GAPDH isoform 2 was increased by PostC only in theWTheart. The third group included three proteins that play role in fatty acid or glucose metabolism. These proteins were modified by PostC only in thedb/dbheart (Table 1). Most interestingly, in the fourth category, a low molecular weight stress protein-heat shock protein beta-6 (HSPB6 or Hsp20) was significantly depressed for 2.32-fold by PostC only in thedb/dbhearts (Table 1). Furthermore, the fifth group of five mitochondrial proteins showed an opposing trend (WT versus db/db) in the protein abundance changes following PostC. In theWTgroup, two proteins (F1-ATPase gamma and Echs1; highlighted with dashed line boxes inTable 1) were down-regulated by PostC and these changes were absent in thedb/dbgroup. On the other hand, three proteins related to mitochondrial respiratory chain were decreased by PostC in thedb/dbgroup, but notWTgroup (Table 1). Finally, the sixth group consists of 11 proteins including 10 positively identified have less certain functional roles in the heart. Among these, seven proteins were down-regulated by PostC in thedb/dbhearts only. Most notably, a ?51 kD protein was enhanced by PostC for 3.44-folds in theWTheart only. The identity of this protein could not be determined. Fig. 3shows representative DeCyder 3-D images highlighting the substantial differences in protein abundance between the I-R andI-R+PostC WTmouse hearts for F1-ATPase gamma and Echs1. Representative three-dimensional DeCyder software integrated graphs showing differences in protein abundance between the C57BL/6J wild-type mouse hearts subjected to ischaemia-reperfusion (I-R) alone (left) and to postconditioning intervention (I-R+PostC; right). Note that PostC remarkably down-regulated (F1-ATPase gamma) and Echs1 proteins. In this study, we show that PostC significantly reduced myocardial infarct size by 64% in theWTmice, but it was ineffective in protecting the Type 2 diabeticdb/dbmice against I-R injury. Although there has been mounting evidence for the cardioprotective efficacy of PostC in normal individuals of various species [1-7], there are only limited number of PostC studies in diseased animals. For example, it was reported that cardioprotective effect of PostC was blunted in aged mice [15], hypercholesterolemic rabbits [16] and leptin-deficient obese ob/ob mice [13]. This study (Fig. 1) also strongly suggests that the deficiency of long isoforms of leptin receptors (db/dbmice) impedes the cardioprotective effects of PostC. Despite some common pathological features among the ob/ob anddb/dbmice, such as obesity and hyperglycaemia, there are also differences between these two mutant strains of mice. The most distinctive difference is that unlike the ob/ob mice that completely lack of leptin, thedb/dbmice actually have hyperleptinaemia [17]. Previous studies have shown increased mortality [18] and acute renal failure [17] caused by endotoxin in the ob/ob mice, whereas thedb/dbmice were much more resistant to the detrimental effects of endotoxin [17]. Furthermore, hyperleptinaemia is a hallmark in human obesity [19] and the serum leptin levels are positively correlated with insulin resistance in Type 2 diabetic patients, after correction with age, gender and body fat mass [20]. Therefore, this study showing efficacy of PostC indb/dbmice is important and more relevant to the human Type 2 diabetic patients' defects as compared with those in the ob/ob mice [13]. A recent study by Przyklenket al. [21] also investigated PostC in both Type 1 and Type 2 diabetic mice. Although results of this study conceptually support our results in Type 2 diabetic mice (Fig. 1), there are several methodological differences worth mentioning. First, the strain ofdb/dbmice was different, that is BKS.Cg-m+/+LeprNone/J strain (The Jackson Laboratory stock number 000642) was used by Przyklenket al. [21]versusB6.BKS(D)-LeprNone/J strain (stock number 000697) used in this study. More importantly, we used anin vivoregional I-R model, in contrast to theex vivoglobal I-R model in Langendorff isolated, buffer-perfused hearts in the other study [21]. Even though thein vivomodel is a better mimic of the pathophysiological characteristics of the diabetic patients with acute myocardial ischaemia (e.g. the presence of hyperglycaemia and hyperleptinaemia during the course of regional myocardial I-R), the failure of PostC in the Type 2 diabeticdb/dbmice was identical regardless of the model differences. Another major advance in this study is the proteomic identification of several novel protein targets that could be responsible the loss of PostC in Type 2 diabetic hearts. As shown inTable 1, the 17 kD heat shock protein beta-6 (abbreviated as HSPB6 or most commonly Hsp20) was down-regulated 2.32-fold by PostC in thedb/dbheart only. Because the cardioprotective effect of this small heat shock protein has been demonstrated against I-R injury [22], we believe that the decreased Hsp20 expression in the db/db heart following PostC may be potential cause for the ineffectiveness of PostC in these mice. It is noteworthy that the levels of Hsp20 expression were similar in theWT versus db/dbhearts under non-I-R baseline condition (data not shown). The two other proteins are gamma subunit of mitochondrial F1 complex of ATP synthase (F1-ATPase gamma) and Echs1, which were down-regulated by PostC only in theWTheart. We speculate that the decreased F1-ATPase gamma would lead to reduced myocardial ATP consumption during reperfusion and the lower Echs1 would reduce beta-oxidation of fatty acids thereby limiting I-R injury [23]. Interestingly, under the non-ischaemic basal condition, Echs1 expression was not detectable in eitherWTordb/dbhearts. However, F1-ATPase gamma was up-regulated in thedb/dbheart by 1.76-fold as compared with theWTcontrol. Apparently, the higher level of F1-ATPase gamma in the Type-2 diabetic heart made the heart more vulnerable to I-R injury, as shown by the larger myocardial infarct size (Fig. 1C). In addition, we observed four other proteins (i.e. peroxiredoxin 5, cardiac isoform of myosin regulatory light chain, fibrinogen alpha polypeptide and fibrinogen beta chain precursor) that were modified by PostC in bothWTanddb/dbhearts (Table 1). Although PostC-induced changes in these proteins were not sufficient to lead to infarct size reduction in the Type 2 diabetic hearts, their importance in PostC-induced protection should not be down-played. In particular, the mitochondrial antioxidant enzyme-peroxiredoxin 5 was found to play a role in nitrate-induced protection against doxorubicin cardiotoxicity [14]. Finally, it is noteworthy that our proteomic analysis was performed in the heart tissue samples collected at the end of 24 hrs reperfusion period, which is the same time-point for determining myocardial infarct size. Therefore, the differential responses in protein expression to PostC between the non-diabetic controls and Type 2 diabetic mice (Table 1) should reflect a steady-state changes in cardiac protein abundance rather than the transient changes in phosphorylation levels of several kinases (such as ERK, Akt and GSK3beta) immediately following the PostC intervention. We did not intend to reconfirm the blunted early kinase response to PostC in diabetic hearts as previously shown [21], instead, we focused on identifying those stably modified protein targets throughout the prolonged (24 hrs) reperfusion period. It is well-known that the molecular determinants of myocardial infarct size are multi-factorial. There are injurious factors at the very onset of reperfusion, such as overproduction of reactive oxygen species (ROS), intracellular Ca2+/-overload and opening of mitochondrial permeability transition pore, which are known to be inhibited by PostC. However, it is much less clear how PostC influences myocyte viability during the later stage of prolonged reperfusion, in which the factors such as interstitial neutrophil infiltration and migration that can cause the secondary pro-inflammatory responses and persistent generation of ROS, which in turn contribute to the additional cardiac cell death and increase of infarct size. To our knowledge, this study is the first attempt to investigate the proteomic changes caused by PostC throughout the entire 24 hrs reperfusion period. Nevertheless, these proteomic findings alone do not confirm nor disapprove a causality for these differentially expression proteins in acquisition or loss of cardioprotection by PostC. It simply provides a non-biased clue for conducting further investigations on these positively identified protein targets. In conclusion, this study provides firstin vivoevidence that PostC fails to protect Type 2 diabeticdb/dbmice against I-R injury. These findings raise concerns of the potential utility of PostC in cardioprotection in Type 2 diabetic patients. Our study also identified three PostC-modified proteins (Hsp20, F1-ATPase gamma and Echs1) that were differentially regulated in the Type 2 diabetic animals as compared with the normal controls. Further studies are needed to elucidate the cause-and-effect relationship of these proteins and the loss of PostC in the diabetic hearts.