According to the recent census in the United States (2010),Nonethe average U.S. family has approximately four family members in the household, with over 65% of families having more than one child in the same household. Given how common it is for adolescents to live with multiple family members (i.e., parents, siblings), and the known high prevalence of adolescent obesity,None,Noneit is important to understand whether and how multiple family members' behaviors are related to adolescents' weight and weight-related behaviors (e.g., fruit and vegetable intake, physical activity, screen time). Additionally, sibling influences on adolescent weight-related behaviors are key to investigate because sibling relationships are the longest lasting relationships,Nonein terms of life expectancy, and may have the most sustained influence on adolescents' weight-related behaviors as adolescents transition into adulthood. While it is recognized that the "family" influences adolescents' weight and weight-related behaviors (e.g., dietary intake, physical activity, sedentary behaviors), the majority of studies have only investigated the parent and adolescent relationship. NoneVery limited research has investigated how multiple family members' weight and weight-related behaviors are associated with adolescents' weight, dietary intake and physical activity. None,NoneFor example, it is unknown whether siblings' or parents' weight and weight-related behaviors are more highly correlated with adolescents' weight, dietary intake and physical activity. NoneAddressing these types of questions will help to identify key family member(s) whose own behaviors are associated with adolescents' weight and weight-related behaviors, thus informing which family member(s) may be important to include in obesity prevention interventions. Numerous previous studies have examined parental influences on adolescent obesity risk. None,None-NoneParent feeding practices (i.e., restriction, pressuring),None-Noneparenting style (i.e., authoritative, authoritarian, permissive, neglectful),None,None-Nonefrequent family mealsNone-Noneparent modeling and encouraging of healthful behaviorsNone-Nonehave all been examined in regards to childhood obesity risk. Results suggest that restrictive parent feeding practices are associated with increased obesity riskNone-Noneand authoritative parenting styleNone,None-Noneand frequent family mealsNone-Noneare associated with more healthful dietary behaviors and reduced risk of obesity, although findings have not always been consistent. NoneHowever, the associations between parent modeling healthful eating and physical activity behaviors and adolescents' weight and weight-related behaviors are less clear. For example, some studies have shown associations between parent modeling of healthful eating and physical activity and adolescent lower body mass index (BMI) z-score and more healthful dietary intake and hours of physical activityNone,Noneand other studies have shown few or no significant associations. None,NoneWhile numerous studies have been conducted in the field of family studies and psychology regarding the influence of siblings on adolescent delinquency, depression, risk taking behaviors (e.g., smoking, drinking, drugs, risky sexual behavior) and peer competency (i.e., ability to relate and be accepted by peers),None-Nonevery limited research has examined the association between siblings' and adolescents' weight and weight-related behaviors. The majority of sibling research has been conducted on twins investigating similarities on weight status,None,Nonechronic health conditions (e.g., diabetes, high blood pressure),None-Noneand disordered eating behaviors. None-NoneFindings show that twins typically have similar weight status, risk factors for chronic disease, and disordered eating behaviors, but it is unclear whether twins have similar weight-related behaviors (e.g., dietary intake, physical activity). None-NoneOne study that did look specifically at sibling influences on adolescent weight, physical activity and dietary behaviors examined associations between sibling closeness and conflict and adolescents' health attitudes, exercise behaviors, and weight status above and beyond parent-child relationship qualities. NoneResults showed that sibling closeness was positively associated with adolescents' health attitudes and exercise behaviors after controlling for parent-child relationship qualities and individual characteristics such as temperament. NoneThe current study will examine correlations between parents' and adolescent siblings' weight and weight-related behaviors in order to address gaps in the previous literature related to parent modeling of dietary and physical activity patterns and the understudied influence of siblings. Additionally, birth order of siblings will also be examined to understand the relationship between older and younger sibling's weight and weight-related behaviors. This multi-informant familial data, representing a diverse ethnic/racial and socio-economic sample, will allow for determining key family members who may be important to include, or whose relationships would be important to address, in adolescent obesity prevention interventions. Family Systems TheoryNoneguides the hypotheses and data analysis plan for the current study. Family Systems Theory recognizes multiple familial influences on youth weight and weight-related behaviors and posits that a change in one part of the family system affects other parts of the system. For example, if a sibling is physically active and eats healthfully this may promote physical activity and healthful eating in the adolescent. The current study proposes to examine whether certain family members' (i.e., siblings) weight and weight-related behaviors are more highly correlated with adolescent weight and weight-related behaviors than others (i.e., parents). The main study hypotheses include: (1) Adolescent siblings' weight and weight-related behaviors (i.e., fruit and vegetable intake, fast food consumption, sugar-sweetened beverage consumption, breakfast frequency, physical activity, sedentary behavior, dieting) will be more significantly correlated compared to parents' and adolescent siblings' weight and weight-related behaviors; and (2) Weight and weight-related behaviors among older siblings will be more significantly correlated with adolescents' weight, dietary intake and physical activity as compared to weight and weight-related behaviors among younger siblings. Data for this analysis were drawn from two coordinated, population-based studies. NoneEAT 2010 (Eating and Activity in Teens) was designed to examine dietary intake, physical activity, weight control behaviors, weight status and factors associated with these outcomes in adolescents. Project F-EAT (Families and Eating and Activity Among Teens) was designed to examine factors within the family and home environment (e.g., parent behaviors, family functioning, home food and physical activity resources) of potential relevance to adolescents' weight and weight-related behaviors. Survey development for both EAT 2010 and F-EAT are described elsewhere. NoneDrafts of the surveys were pre-tested by 56 adolescents and 35 parents from diverse backgrounds for clarity, readability and relevance; and reviewed by an interdisciplinary team of experts. After revisions, the survey was additionally pilot tested with a different sample of 129 middle school and high school students and 102 parents to examine the test-retest reliability of measures over a one to two-week period. All study procedures were approved by the University of Minnesota's Institutional Review Board Human Subjects Committee and the participating school districts. For EAT 2010, surveys and anthropometric measures were completed by 2,793 adolescents from 20 public middle schools and high schools in the Minneapolis/St. Paul metropolitan area of Minnesota during the 2009-2010 academic year. For Project F-EAT, data were collected by surveying up to two parents/caregivers (n=3,709) of the adolescents in EAT 2010 by mail or phone interviews. In total, 2,382 EAT 2010 (85%) adolescent participants had at least one parent respond and there were two parent respondents for 1,327 adolescents. The study sample for the current analysis was restricted to those adolescents with a sibling in the EAT survey that also had the same primary parent reporting in the F-EAT survey. Pairs of siblings were identified through the matching of addresses and birth dates of parent-respondents in the F-EAT survey. Adolescents that did not live with their primary parent at least half of the time were not included in the analysis. The final sample (Table 1) included 58 triads of two adolescent siblings and their primary parent. The first siblings of the pair to participate in the survey were equally split by gender (50%), racially diverse (White - 14%; Black - 15%; Hispanic - 19%; Asian American - 28%; Native American/Other - 24%), with a mean age of 14.3 years. The second siblings of the pair to enroll in the survey were 64% female, similarly racially diverse (White - 14%; Black - 15%; Hispanic - 19%; Asian American - 26%; Native American/Other - 22%), with a mean age of 14.8 years. Primary parents were predominantly female (91%), racially diverse (White - 22%; Black - 19%; Hispanic - 21%; Asian American - 26%; Native American/Other - 10%), 50% completed some college or more, with a mean age of 41.7 years. All parent and adolescent siblings' weight and weight-related behaviors (i.e., fruit and vegetable intake, fast food consumption, sugar-sweetened beverage intake, breakfast frequency, dieting, physical activity, sedentary behaviors) used in analyses are described inTable 2. Descriptive statistics were calculated for relevant study variables including means and standard deviations for continuous variables and frequencies and percentages for categorical variables (Table 1). To evaluate the strength of associations between parent and child or between siblings for the outcome of interest (e.g., amount of weekly physical activity), correlations were estimated by fitting models using generalized estimating equations (GEE) with a second-degree stationary (Toeplitz) working correlation matrix. This correlation matrix specifies two separate correlation parameters: one parameter models the correlation between outcomes for the first and second sibling; a second parameter models correlation between outcomes for parent and sibling. The correlation between parent and sibling 1 and the correlation between parent and sibling 2 are assumed to be identical in this working correlation matrix. Continuous dependent variables (e.g., weekly hours of physical activity, weekly hours of sedentary activity, daily servings of fruits and vegetables, weekly frequency of fast food consumption, daily consumption of sugary beverages, and weekly frequency of eating breakfast) were modeled as the dependent variable with separate linear regressions. Adolescent BMI percentile was dichotomized to overweight/obese vs. nonoverweight, using a cut-point of greater than or equal to the 85thpercentile. Parent BMI (kg/m2) was dichotomized to overweight/obese vs. nonoverweight using a cutpoint of greater than or equal to 25 (kg/m2). Weight status and dieting, both dichotomous variables, were modeled using GEE logistic regression. All models included an indicator term for the primary parent, a term for age (continuous), a term for gender (female/male), and indicator variables for race/ethnicity (White/African American/Hispanic/Asian American/Hawaiian, Native American, Other). To test if the correlation terms were statistically different from zero or from each other, a cluster bootstrap procedure was implemented to estimate the standard error of the correlations as well as the difference between the correlations. The bootstrap was implemented for 5,000 iterations and 95% CI were estimated based on percentiles of the bootstrap distribution. Tests of significance were based on whether the percentile interval of interest included the null hypothesis. To investigate potential interactions between birth order of the adolescent and their sibling on outcomes, we examined interactions between birth order (whether the sibling was older/younger than the target adolescent) and the independent sibling variables. There were no statistically significant interactions found; final models did not include an interaction term. Overall, results indicated that some weight-related behaviors (i.e., fast food consumption, breakfast frequency, sedentary behaviors) between siblings were significantly positively correlated. Additionally, there were no significant correlations between parents' weight and weight-related behaviors and adolescent siblings' weight and weight-related behaviors (Table 3). Furthermore, some significant correlations between adolescent siblings' weight-related behaviors were significantly different from parents and adolescent siblings' weight-related behaviors. Adolescent siblings' weight status was not significantly correlated, after adjusting for adolescent age, gender, and race/ethnicity. Additionally, parent and adolescent siblings' weight status was not significantly correlated (Table 3). Adolescent siblings' fast food consumption and breakfast frequency were significantly positively correlated, after adjusting for adolescent age, gender, and race/ethnicity (Table 3). There were no significant correlations between siblings' fruit and vegetable intake. In addition, there were no significant correlations between parent fruit and vegetable intake, fast food consumption, breakfast frequency, sugar-sweetened beverage consumption and adolescent siblings' same behaviors. The correlation between adolescent siblings' fast food consumption significantly differed from the correlation between parents' and adolescent siblings' fast food consumption (Table 3). Siblings' hours of sedentary behavior per week were significantly positively correlated, after adjusting for adolescent age, gender, and race/ethnicity (Table 3). There was not a significant correlation between parents' hours of sedentary behaviors per week and adolescent siblings' sedentary behaviors per week. Additionally, the significant positive correlation between siblings' sedentary patterns was significantly different from the correlation between parents' and adolescent siblings' sedentary patterns. There were no significant correlations between siblings' hours of physical activity or parents' and siblings' hours of physical activity (table 3). Adolescent siblings' dieting behaviors were not significantly correlated, after adjusting for adolescent age, gender, and race/ethnicity. Additionally, parent and adolescent siblings' dieting behaviors were not significantly correlated (Table 3). There were no statistically significant interactions by birth order of the sibling. This suggests that all siblings' weight and weight-related behaviors found to be significantly correlated were not driven by whether the sibling was younger or older. The results of the current study suggest that some weight-related behaviors between siblings are highly correlated, for better or for worse. For example, adolescent siblings' breakfast eating frequency was significantly positively correlated (i.e., when one adolescent ate breakfast it was highly likely the other adolescent also ate breakfast). However, siblings' fast food intake and sedentary activity behaviors were also significantly positively correlated. This finding supports limited previous research showing that siblings' weight and health attitudes are similar. NoneBecause many of the significant correlations between siblings in the current study were unhealthful behaviors (i.e., fast food consumption, sedentary behavior), it may be important for future interventions to include both siblings when trying to combat negative health behaviors in the home environment. Family Systems TheoryNonewould support this recommendation, in that targeting both siblings would increase the likelihood that both siblings would engage in more healthful behaviors through reciprocally reinforcing each other's positive weight-related behaviors (and potentially other family members' weight-related behaviors too). While not all correlations were significantly different, results of the current study indicated that adolescent siblings' weight-related behaviors were more significantly correlated as compared to parents' and adolescent siblings' weight-related behaviors. This finding may be important for researchers and practitioners who work with families with adolescent siblings. It may be the case that involving siblings in adolescent obesity prevention efforts would be helpful, potentially even more than parent's involvement. Another interesting finding from the current study was that the interaction between sibling birth-order was not significant. Previous literature in the fields of family studies and psychology suggests that older siblings are more influential on adolescent health attitudes, risk taking behaviors and depressive symptoms. NoneThis is an interesting finding and may indicate that with regard to targeting adolescent weight-related behaviors it is equally useful to involve a younger or older sibling. However, our limited sample size may have prevented us from detecting an interaction even if one existed. Results of this study indicate the potential importance of siblings in understanding adolescents' weight-related behaviors. Future research is needed that incorporates mixed methods designs (i.e., qualitative and quantitative) in order to examine more in-depth the multiple relationships in the home environment and the role of each family member in regards to adolescents' weight and weight-related behaviors. Additionally, mixed methods designs would be able to investigate further why siblings' weight-related behaviors are more significantly correlated with adolescents' weight-related behaviors as compared to parents. Such information would inform future adolescent obesity prevention interventions by being able to target the family relationships that may have the most influence on changing adolescents' weight and weight-related behaviors. There were several strengths and limitations of the current study that need to be taken into account when interpreting findings. Strengths of the study include drawing from a large and diverse community-based epidemiological cohort study. Additionally, family triads (parent, adolescent, sibling) were studied, which is rarely done in the obesity field. Furthermore, all participants self-reported on their weight-related behaviors. One limitation of the study is that, in order to match parent, adolescent and sibling triads, the sample size was greatly reduced and we may have had less power in analyses. Further, results may be less generalizable in terms of race and ethnicity in comparison to the overall Project EAT sample. The complexity of relationships in the home environment is an under-researched area in relation to adolescent obesity and has been a barrier to the progress of the field in understanding the connection between the home environment and adolescent obesity and translating findings into successful interventions. The current study indicates that some of adolescent siblings' weight-related behaviors are significantly positively correlated as compared to parents' and adolescents' weight-related behaviors. Thus, public health researchers and practitioners who work with adolescents may want to consider including adolescents' siblings when targeting adolescents' weight and weight-related behaviors.