Anybody can draw a picture, but pictures painted by famous painters such as van Gogh, Monet and Picasso are praised as "art". At the present time, many chemists are able to synthesize natural products, even those having complicated structure, using advanced organic chemistry. However, not all such synthesis is above the mundane and can thus be raised to the level of "art". Hence, the unique significance of the synthesis and development of compounds which possess bioactivity. The author is of the opinion that "art" is a sublimate of originality, and has inherent special characteristics, and, in the 21st century, it should be recognized as such. Among bioactive natural products, several antibiotics, termed the "Big Four", were the foremost subject of research at the time the author started his study of antibiotic synthesis. None)As shown in Fig. 1, they were the macrolides (oleandomycin (1), erythromycin A (2), carbomycin, leucomycin A3(3), tylosin (4)), aminoglycosides (kanamycin (5), apramycin (6), saccharocin), beta-lactams (thienamycin (7)) and tetracyclines (tetracycline (8)). The author's group has fortunately succeeded in completing the total syntheses of 93 diverse bioactive natural products, including the above-mentioned representatives of the big four antibiotics, and 86 of them represented the first total synthesis of the respective compounds. None)It is noteworthy that most of optically active compounds have been synthesized efficiently using carbohydrates as chiral sources, to help determine the absolute structure and to clarify their structure-activity relationships. The methodologies devised are now established as the usual way in the natural product synthesis. None),None)The first total synthesis requires the creation of original synthesis concepts and methodologies, including the definition of the absolute structure of the bioactive natural products, as well as the verification of their biological activities. In the present paper, the author introduces the dynamic as well as elegant parts of his total synthesis of practically-useful bioactive natural products, focusing not only on "art" but also on the significance of the total syntheses, and featuring his concept of "total synthesis reveals all". When a stone is thrown into a pond, several ripples are produced in succession, gradually radiating outward from the point of entry until they finally cover the whole pond. The 'stone' in macrolide synthesis was the news that R. B. Woodward had begun the total synthesis of erythromycin A (2) in 1973. His group accomplished the total synthesis in 1981. Some ripples from this point of origin are represented by Masamune's methymycin synthesis in 1977, Corey's erythronolide synthesis in 1978 and our syntheses of carbomycin B, leucomycin A3(3) and tylosin (4) in 1977 and 1981. None),None)The major targets, leucomycin A3and tylosin, were developed and marketed as medicinally useful antibiotics by Omura's group. None)The first total syntheses of the 16-membered macrolide antibiotics, A26771B, carbomycin B, leucomycin A3(josamycin) and tylosin were accomplished in our laboratories. None),None)These syntheses were based on the stereoselective construction of the carbon skeletons from D-glucose as shown in Fig. 2. The first total synthesis of tylosin (4) was accomplished by coupling of the C1-C10 (13) and C11-C15 (14) segments derived from D-glucose, and the stereo- and regio-selective introduction of the three sugar moieties (17,19and22) (Scheme 1). None)TheC-methyl compound9, derived from D-glucose, was converted into the unsaturated ester10, which was transformed to the methyl ketone13through a Michael addition with lithiated methyl methylthiomethyl sulfoxide to give the branched ester12. This addition of the lithiated reagent to the correct position from the desired side was effectively assisted by the metal chelation between the isopropylidene oxygen and the carboxyl oxygen of the transition state11, to give only the natural configuration at C6, as expected. This step was the first key component in completion of the synthesis. The aldehyde14was also derived from D-glucose through the branched alcohol. Aldol condensation of13with14gave the unsaturated keto-ester15, which was transformed to the seco-acid, followed by lactonization according to Corey's procedureNone)to give a tylonolide derivative16, following formation of the acetal of the aldehyde group. The ethylene acetal16was submitted to initial glycosylation with D-mycaminosyl bromide17, yielding the beta-glycoside18after methanolysis. The second glycosylation, accomplished by our particular method,None)using the glycal of mycarose19plus 1,3-dibromo-5,5-dimethylhydantoin, to give the 2-bromo-2-deoxy-alpha-glycoside20followed by deprotection and debromination afforded de-mycinosyl tylosin (21). The third glycosylation, using the mycinosyl bromide22under Koenigs-Knorr conditions, followed by deprotection, completed the total synthesis of tylosin (4). The intermediary21was found to show strong antibiotic activities, even against Gram-negative bacteria, while tylosin itself was not known to possess significant activities against them. None)The author's group accomplished the first total synthesis of a 14-membered macrolide antibiotic, oleandomycin (1) (Scheme 2). None)As mentioned above, this is also based on the construction of the skeleton from carbohydrates, L- and D-rhamnosides,23and24, and then cyclization by intramolecular Horner-Emmons reaction after esterification of the C1-C7 and C8-C14 segments,27and28, which were derived from the enantiomeric intermediates25and26. The sugar moieties30and31were regio- and stereoselectively introduced on the aglycone, oleandolide (29), to give oleandomycin (1). The total synthesis of erythromycin A (2) was also accomplished in our laboratories via an original stereo- and regioselective introduction of sugar moieties to the aglycone32(Scheme 3). None)The glycosylation to the C3 hydroxyl group of29and erythronolide derivative33predictively posed an extremely difficult problem, due to the low reactivity connected with the sterically crowded nature of the C3 hydroxyl group and the formation of a hydrogen bond between its hydroxyl group and C1 carbonyl group. However, our glycosylation, using the 2,6-anhydro-2-thio sugar34worked very efficiently to give the desired alpha-glycoside35in 92% yield. This was converted to erythromycin A (2) through desulfurization to give the 2,6-dideoxyglycoside. We also developed several other glycosylation methods to synthesize many natural products. None)Tubelactomicin A (46) was isolated from the culture broth ofNocardiasp. MK703-102F1 and showed strong and specific antimicrobial activities against drug-resistantMycobacteriumsp. None)Its structure was determined by X-ray crystallographic analysis to be the 16-membered lactone fused with a trans-decalin skeleton. Our total synthesis was completed from L-arabinose,None)although, independently, another successful synthesis was reported. None)The stereochemical array of the northern part of the compound was derived from L-arabinose (36) (Scheme 4). The lactone37was submitted to stereoselective methylation and reductive ring-opening to give the diol38, possessing functionality to be the northern part39. The decalin moiety43, the southern part of tubelactomicin A, was constructed by intramolecular Diels-Alder reaction. Citronerol (40) was converted to the triene41. The stereoselective Diels-Alder reaction to construct the additional four chiral centers was realized by heating41in xylene, which gave the adduct42as a single product. This was converted to43to couple with the northern part39. Treatment of the mixture of39and43under the conditions of Suzuki coupling gave the tetraene seco-acid44after desilylation. None)The seco-acid44was submitted to the macrolactonization by the Shiina methodNone)to construct the lactone45. Deprotection and selective oxidation afforded (+)-tubelactomicin A (46). (+)-Cochleamycin A (58) was isolated by the Kirin Brewery group from a cultured broth ofStreptomycessp. and showed cytotoxicity against P388 leukemia cells and antimicrobial activities. None)The relative stereochemistry was elucidated and detected a 5-6-10-6-membered tetracyclic core (Scheme 5). We accomplished the first total synthesis of cochleamycin A, which facilitated determination of the absolute structure, by using intramolecular Diels-Alder reaction followed by direct construction of the 10 membered rings,None)which was well-known to be difficult. After our first total synthesis, Roush's group reported another synthesis route. None)For maximum convergency, the acyclic precursor52of the Diels-Alder reaction was constructed by connection of two chiral segments,48and50, which were prepared from a small carbohydrate47and (S)-1,2,4-trihydroxybutane (49), respectively, by our previously developed methodologies. None)Coupling of48and50proceeded smoothly to give the alcohol51in quantitative yield. This was selectively reduced to thecis,trans-diene structure, which was crucial to the construction of the desired 5-6-membered ring by intramolecular Diels-Alder reaction. Oxidation of the allylic alcohol gave the alpha,beta-unsaturated aldehyde52, which was submitted to intramolecular Diels-Alder reaction in the presence of Yb(fod)3at 140 degrees C. The desired adduct53was obtained as a single product in good yield. This intramolecular Diels-Alder reaction produced four critical stereocenters, as expected. The desired cyclization of the bromo-aldehyde54was accomplished with SmI2to give the 10-6-5-membered tricyclic product55as a single product, comprising the fully elaborated structure ready for conversion to the cochleamycin (58). Lactonization of the seco-acid56was realized under Kita's conditionsNone)to afford the 10-membered lactone concomitant with the formation of the delta-lactone ring. The allylic alcohol of the lactone57was oxidized to alpha,beta-unsaturated ketone by exposure to MnO2, followed by selective acetylation with AcONa and Ac2O at 60 degrees C to afford (+)-cochleamycin A (58). The synthetic58was identical in all respects, including the optical rotation, with natural cochleamycin A, completing the first total synthesis to establish the absolute structure. Thus, the simplest carbohydrate47was efficiently used for the total synthesis. In addition, the first total synthesis of another tetracyclic antibiotic having a unique gamma-lactone, tetrodecamycin (59), was also accomplished by using47in our laboratories. None)The author's synthetic studies on antibiotics began with the determination of the absolute structure and the total synthesis of kanamycins (5) (Fig. 1). None)Subsequently, in 1982, the author had another chance to undertake work on the total synthesis of aminoglycoside antibiotics, namely, apramycin (6) and saccharocin (69) (Scheme 6). Apramycin (6) and saccharocin (69) are antibiotics active against Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria, including strains resistant to other aminoglycoside antibiotics. Structurally,6and69contain the unusual bicyclic aminooctodialdose and, in addition, 4-amino-4-deoxy-D-glucose and D-glucose units respectively. None),None)The first total synthesis of apramycin and saccharocin was accomplished in our laboratories in 1983. None)Our starting point was the known aminoglycoside antibiotic, neamine (60), which had already been synthesized by us. Neamine was converted into the aldehyde61by effective oxidation of the primary amino group (Scheme 6). The aldehyde61was converted by our carbon-elongation method to the acetyl glycal62. This was submitted to azidonitration using sodium azide and ammonium ceric nitrate to give azidoglycosyl nitrate63. The C3 position of the dimesylate64was selectively chlorinated to form the 3'-chloro compound, which was dechlorinated with tributylstannane to give the 3'-deoxy compound65. Epimerization of the 6'-hydroxy group, by heating65with sodium acetate trihydrate, yielded theciscyclic carbamate66needed for the apramycin skeleton. Removal of all protecting groups gave aprosamine (67: Z = H), which wasN-benzyloxy-carbonylated to67. In the glycosylation studies on67, the best result was realized under modified Mukaiyama conditionsNone)using 4-azido-2,3,6-tri-O-benzyl-4-deoxy-beta-D-glucopyranosyl fluoride (68) to give the glycoside, subsequently deprotected by hydrogenolysis to furnish apramycin. Similarly, saccharocin was synthesized by glycosylation of67with 2,3,4,6-tetra-O-benzyl-beta-D-glucopyranosyl fluoride. The molecular architecture associated with the beta-lactam antibiotics has posed some of the greatest challenges in synthetic chemistry, and this family has provided the stimulus for development of novel methodologies for construction of their skeletons and side chains. Among the cephem antibiotics, the fourth generation has been especially noteworthy (Scheme 8). Thienamycin (7) was discovered in fermentation broths ofStreptomyces cattleyaand showed exceptional antibacterial potency and spectrum. None)(+)-4-Acetoxy-3-hydroxyethyl-2-azetidinone (80) has been well-known as a highly versatile intermediate for the synthesis of carbapenem antibiotics, such as thienamycin (Scheme 7). None)The synthesis of80was initiated by the Sankyo group, followed by the Merck group, and culminated in the practical preparation by two Japanese companies, using Noyori-Murahashi's asymmetric procedures and chem-enzymatic procedures, respectively. None)The first stereocontrolled synthesis of (+)-thienamycin (7) was reported by the Merck group, and the transformation of80to7was also made more attractive by a second Merck group. Consequently, the synthesis of the azetidinone80constitutes a formal total synthesis of (+)-thienamycin (7). None)We reported a novel enantiospecific synthesis of80from a carbohydrate through our developed skeletal rearrangement and stereoselective epimerization (Scheme 7). None)Our starting material was the commercially-available methyl 2-amino-2,6-dideoxy-alpha-D-glucopyranoside (70), which has also been isolated from natural sources. None)Reaction of70witho-benzenedisulfonyl dichloride gave the cyclic sulfonate71, which was submitted to our skeletal rearrangement, including ring-contraction with potassiumtert-butoxide. The resulting 3-formyl-furanoside72was oxidized to the carboxylic acid73in 91% yield. Removal of theN-sulfonyl group of73by Birch reduction produced the corresponding amino acid74. This was hydrolyzed and then esterified to give the furanose75. Oxidation of75to the lactone76was the key step of our strategy, although the lactone could not be obtained under usual oxidation conditions. We finally discovered that, on exposure to Ag2CO3/Celite in benzene, the75was smoothly oxidized to the gamma-lactone76despite the presence of the amino group. The next important operation in the synthesis was to epimerize stereoselectively and simultaneously the configurations at the C2 and C3 positions of76. The best result was realized by using DBU in MeOH to afford predominantly the desired amino ester77. This result indicated that the C4 configuration of76controlled the stereoselective construction of the C2 and C3 configurations of77. Hydrolysis with 2M NaOH led to the hydroxy acid78, which was in turn submitted to the beta-lactam formation. For our purpose, a Grignard-mediated cyclization of the silylated derivative seemed most promising. Thus,78was silylated with trimethylsilyl chloride and hexamethyldisilazane (HMDS), followed by treatment withtert-butylmagnesium chloride to give the bis-silylated beta-lactam79. Oxidative decarboxylation by Pb(OAc)4gave exclusively the desired (+)-4-acetoxy-3-hydroxyethyl-2-azetidinone (80), with removal of silyl groups. This was identical in all respects to the authentic sample. None)Overall, the yield was approximately 35% in 11 steps from70. Key steps include our original skeletal rearrangement with ring-contraction, oxidation of the 2-aminofuranose, and stereoselective epimerization to the desired configurations. Recently, (Z)-7beta-[2-(5-amino-1,2,4-thiadiazol-3-yl)-2-(alkoxyimino)acetamido]-cephalosporins, such as cefozopran (89), have been reported as clinically useful antibiotics having excellent antimicrobial activities. None)Their common acyl moiety at the C7 position corresponds to theZ-isomer (for example,88) of 2-(5-amino-1,2,4-thiadiazol-3-yl)-2-(alkoxyimino)acetic acid (Scheme 8). TheE-isomer is known to be of little value for beta-lactam antibiotic use. Consequently, it was our intention to successfully develop a novel general method of entry into theZ-isomer, even though several methods have already been reported for the production of88. We devised a novel and concise preparation directed toward the mass production of the (Z)-methoxyimino compound: (Z)-2-(5-amino-1,2,4-thiadiazol-3-yl)-2-(methoxyimino)acetic acid (88) based on the skeletal rearrangement of the aminoisoxazoles81or84, and stereoselective formation of88(Scheme 8). None)3-Amino-5-methoxyisoxazole (81) was subjected to the skeletal rearrangement in question. A suspension of methyl chloroformate and KSCN in acetonitrile was stirred at 70 degrees C for 30 min to give methoxycarbonyl isothiocyanatein situ, which in turn reacted with81to afford methyl 2-(5-methoxycarbonylamino-1,2,4-thiadiazol-3-yl)acetate (83) in 86% yield, through skeletal rearrangement of the intermediary thiourea derivative82. This reaction mechanism was reasonably supported by the isolation of the similar intermediate85from 3-aminoisoxazole (84). The compound85was also converted to83through86. Oxidation of83gave the 2-oxoacetates87(with DMSO and I2in the presence of catalytic amounts of H2SO4) in 83% yield. The moderate yield was ascribed to purification difficulties due to their polar nature. Without isolation of the keto-ester, the methyl ester83was quantitatively converted into the desiredZ-isomer of 2-(methoxyimino)acetate. Saponification provided the target product88in quantitative yield. This was derived to cefozopran (89), which was marketed in 1995. None)For almost half a century, tetracycline (8) has been widely recognised as a major antibiotic, due to both its unique structural features as well as antibacterial activities. None)The total synthesis of tetracycline families was initiated by Woodward's 6-demethyl-6-deoxytetracycline synthesis in 1962, followed by Muxfeldt's terramycin synthesis in 1968, culminating Stork's 12a-deoxytetracycline synthesis in 1996. None),None)However, all these syntheses have been accomplished only in racemic forms. The total synthesis of natural (-)-tetracycline (8) remained an unanswered challenge, despite the remarkable achievements as described above. In 2000, the first total synthesis of (-)-tetracycline (8) was completed in our laboratories using D-glucosamine as a chiral starting material, which allows stereospecific construction of the densely and sensitively functionalized A ring (Scheme 9). None)In 2005, Myers' group presented a second synthesis of (-)-tetracycline. None)Synthetic studies on related tetracyclic antibiotics were also carried out in our laboratories, and the first total synthesis of UCE-6 (110) was accomplished (Scheme 10). None)Anhydrotetracycline (103) was our first target (Scheme 9)None)as it provides a viable synthetic relay from103to tetracycline (8) via a two-step hydration at the 5a,6-position. None)A reliable 12a-hydroxylation is required for the synthesis of103. The starting-point glucosaminide90, which was prepared from D-glucosamine, was converted into the selenide91. Treatment of91with borane followed by H2O2oxidation stereoselectively gave the alcohol by simultaneous formation of a new olefin group, which was benzylated to the olefin92. This was submitted to Ferrier reaction with HgCl2to give the cyclohexanone93. The [4+2] cycloaddition of the cyclohexenone, which was derived from93by dehydration, with the butadiene95did not proceed because of the steric repulsion. Therefore,93was epimerized at C2 and dehydrated to the isomer94. The alpha-hydroxymethyl group was an important factor for stereospecific introduction of the hydroxy group at 12a to give a furan derivative100. The cycloaddition with95in the presence of 2,6-di-tert-butyl-4-methylphenol (DBMP) proceeded from the beta-face of94, regio- and stereoselectively as expected. This highly-stereoselective reaction gave a labile adduct, which upon acidic oxidation, was transformed to the alpha,beta-unsaturated ketone96. The tandem Michael-Dieckmann type reaction of96with the isobenzofuranone97gave the tetracyclic compound98. None)One of the key problems of this synthesis was the stereoselective introduction of a hydroxyl group at C12a. Manipulation of the protective groups of98gave the diol99, which was adequate to oxidate the right wing. The primary alcohol of99participated in the bromination of C1-12a olefin to give the desired100. Treatment of100with a mixture of PCC and PDC in dichloromethane, followed by purification with silica gel, afforded the aldehyde101in 61% yield. This transformation realized the concurrent oxidation of primary and secondary alcohols accompanied by introduction of the C12a hydroxyl group. The resulting101was converted to the nitrile102by a newly-developed method using hydroxylamine followed by dehydration with 1,1'-carbonyldiimidazole (CDI). The nitrile102was transformed through103and the perhydroxide104into (-)-tetracycline (8), which was identical with natural (-)-tetracycline in all respects, thus completing the first total synthesis. Our tetracycline synthesis was the first to be accomplished, some 50 years after its structure had been determined. The tetracyclic UCE6 (110) was isolated from fermentation broth of Actinomycetes strain and possessed strong antitumor ability. None)From the retrosynthetic perspective, the tetracyclic skeleton is expected to be accessible by the tandem Michael-Dieckmann-type reaction of the benzofuranone108with the cyclic alpha,beta-unsaturated ketone107(Scheme 10). The108was derived from 2-methylresorcinol and the107was prepared by [4+2] cycloaddition of the cyclohexenone105with the diene106. None)The coupling of107and108was effectively carried out under basic conditions to give the tetracyclic product, which was aromatized to the alcohol109as a single product, under mild oxidation conditions concomitant with removal of one of the O-methoxymethyl groups. Deprotection of109afforded racemic UCE6 (110), which was identical with the natural product. Pyranonaphthoquinone antibiotics (111-116) have been shown to possess significant antimicrobial, antifungal and antitumor activities (Fig. 3). Structurally, the stereo-alignment of nanaomycin D (112) is included in nanaomycin A (111) and BE-54238B (116), while that of kalafungin (113) is in medermycin (114) and BE-52440A (115). The representative antibiotics are nanaomycin A (111) and D (112), which were isolated and developed by Omura's group. None)These unique structures have drawn attention both for their synthesis using new methodologies and for the creation of novel biologically active compounds. The author's group accomplished the first total syntheses of these antibiotics, and developed a synthetic strategy for the stereoselective construction of densely-functionalized pyranonaphthoquinones from carbohydrates. None)Carbohydrates have been used widely as chiral sources in stereospecific syntheses of natural products, as mentioned above. None)Although various carbohydrates are available, in most of them one enantiomer is abundant while another isomer is difficult to get in much quantity. Thus, it is hoped that both enantiomeric chiral synthons in the total synthesis are derived from only one abundant enantiomer of a carbohydrate. During synthetic studies on nanaomycin D (112) and its enantiomer, kalafungin (113), in our laboratories, a new methodology was developed to enable synthesis of both enantiomers from a single enantiomeric carbohydrate, creating "enantiodivergent synthesis". None)The critical point of the methodology was catalytic isomerization of stereocenters (Scheme 11). On the protected hydroquinone117, the isomerization at the C3 position was carried out to obtain the lactone118by elimination-recyclization equilibrium under basic conditions. Using the quinone119, the isomerization at C1 and C4 positions was realized to afford the lactone120by enolization-protonation equilibrium under acidic conditions. This methodology was widely applied to the construction of pyranonaphthoquinone antibiotics. The enantiodivergent synthesis of nanaomycin D (112) and kalafungin (113) based on this strategy is shown in Scheme 12. None)Methyl L-rhamnoside (121) was converted into the 2,3-di-O-carbonyl-4-O-tosyl derivative122in 80% overall yield in a one pot reaction, with trichloromethyl chloroformate and then tosyl chloride in pyridine (Scheme 12). Treatment of122with zinc powder and sodium iodide in reflux aqueous acetonitrile gave the unsaturated alcohol123. This olefin formation was also developed in our laboratories. Oxidation of123with pyridinium chlorochromate afforded the stable alpha,beta-unsaturated ketone124. Michael-Dieckmann condensation of124with 4-methoxy-3-(phenylsulfonyl)-1(3H)-isobenzofuranone prepared by Hauser's procedures gave naphthopyranone125, which was transformed to the lactol126in three steps. The lactol126was submitted to Wittig reaction, which afforded thecis-lactone127and thetrans-hydroxyl ester128. The lactone127was oxidized to the quinone129, which was subsequently de-O-methylated to give nanaomycin D (112). The hydroxyl ester128was converted to the quinone130, which was subjected to the above-mentioned acidic isomerization to produce kalafungin (113), the enantiomer of nanaomycin D (112). (+)-BE-52440A (115) was reported as an antitumor agent, produced by aStreptomycesstrain, by the Banyu group in 2000. None)The structure was identified as a dimer of nanaomycin derivatives bridged with sulfur (Scheme 13), although the relative configuration remained unknown. The first total synthesis of115was accomplished by us to help determine the absolute structure. None)We assumed that115would be biogenetically synthesized by epoxy-opening dimerization of OM-173 alphaE (132), which was isolated by the Omura group. None)It was possible to obtain the antibiotic132by stereospecific epoxydation of pyranonaphthoquinone131, which could be derived from the lactone127and gamma-hydroxyester128by our enantiodivergent strategy, as mentioned above. None)The key reaction sequence is a regioselective epoxy-opening dimerization of the tetra-substituted132with Na2S by SN2 reaction of the intermediarytert-thiolate. Firstly, both enatiomeric intermediates [(-)- and (+)-131] were selectively synthesized from the key intermediates127and128. Subsequent epoxidation afforded (+)- and (-)-OM-173 alphaE [(+)- and (-)-132]. The one epimer, (+)-132, was hydrolyzed to natural (+)-nanaomycin E (133),None)which was also isolated by Omura's group, while the other (-)-132, on treatment with Na2S, was converted to natural (+)-BE-52440A (115). Thus their absolute structures were determined. We achieved the enantioselective total synthesis of BE-54238B (116) to confirm its absolute structure (Scheme 14). None)The bromo precursor134was prepared as mentioned above for the synthesis of nanaomycin D (112). The134was lithiated to couple with thel-pyroglutamic acid derivative135to obtain the ketone136. After construction of the pyrrolidine137, Wittig reaction gave thecis-lactone138and thetrans-hydroxyl ester, in 67% and 22% yields, respectively. The lactone138was suitable for the synthesis of the natural product116, while the hydroxyl ester could also be transformed to138in high yield by heating with KHCO3and 18-crown-6 in DMF. Acidic removal of two Boc groups in138was followed by oxidative de-O-methylation to give the quinone139. This was effectively cyclized to the hexacyclic product140through proton-tautomerization. This was de-O-methylated by BCl3to give the re-tautomerized compound116, which was identical in all respects with natural BE-54238B. In recent years, much attention has been focused on the synthesis and development of glycosidase inhibitors because of an increasing awareness of the vital role played by carbohydrates in biological processes. Therefore, the chemical and biochemical studies on glycosidase inhibitors may lead to understanding of the molecular basis of intractable diseases such as diabetes mellitus, cancer and AIDS, and may also provide therapeutic approaches to them. As part of an ongoing program to clarify the mode of action of glycosidase inhibitors, we have synthesized cyclophellitol (147), nagstatin (158), pyralomicin 1c (172), valienamine (173) and validamine (174), and their analogs which have different configurations and functionalities. These syntheses have featured general methods of entry into the carba-sugars and their nitrogenous analogs. None),None),None)Cyclophellitol (147) is a novel beta-D-glucosidase inhibitor isolated from culture filtrates of a mushroom,Phellinussp., and structurally, is a fully oxygenated cyclohexane, corresponding to a carba analog of D-glucopyranose. None)The first total synthesis of147was mainly based on the stereospecific intramolecular [3+2] cycloaddition of a nitrile oxide to an olefin (Scheme 15). None)Its analogs148-151, including the aziridine and thiirane analogs, have also been enantiospecifically synthesized in our laboratories to clarify their mode of action in glycosidase inhibition (Table 1). None)Intramolecular cycloaddition of the oxime142, which was derived from L-glucose (141), was realized by using NaOCl via the intermediary nitrile oxide143to afford the isoxazoline144as a single product. The stereospecific reaction was found to be governed by the configuration of the C2 substituent. The isoxazoline opening was achieved by reduction of144with Raney Ni-W4 in the presence of AcOH to afford the keto-diol, which was silylated with diethylisopropylsilyl triflate to give the protected ketone145. The diethylisopropylsilyl (DEIPS) group was developed in our laboratories and effectively used as anO-protecting group,None)because this silyl group was found to be readily removed under hydrogenolysis conditions using Pd(OH)2. The mesylate146was subjected to hydrogenolysis followed by epoxidation to give cyclophellitol (147), thereby completing the first total synthesis. From the fact that cyclophellitol exhibits a very high beta-D-glucosidase inhibiting activity, we expected that 1,6-epi-cyclophellitol (148) and alpha-mannoanalog151would inhibit alpha-D-glucosidase and alpha-D-mannosidase activities, respectively. None)Epi-cyclophellitol (148), beta-galactoand alpha-mannoanalogs (150and151) were similarly synthesized from methyl alpha-D-galactopyranoside. The aziridine analog149and thiirane analogs were also prepared from147and148. The thiirane analogs having an S atom showed no bioactivity. None),None)Nagstatin (158) is anN-acetyl-beta-D-glucosaminidase inhibitor isolated from the fermentation broth ofStreptomyces amakusaensis. None)Nagstatin (158) and a variety of its analogs157-164were first synthesized from carbohydrates through the inter- and intramolecular nucleophilic reactions with the imidazole and triazole moieties to clarify the structure-activity relationships (Table 1). These compounds were expected to serve as antagonists of the corresponding beta-glycopyranosides. As a starting point, de-branched nagstatin (157) and its hydroxyl analog160were effectively synthesized from 2,3,5-tri-O-benzyl-L-ribofuranose (152) (Scheme 16). None)Reaction of152with lithiatedN-tritylimidazole gave the L-allo(153) and L-altro(154) derivatives in a ratio of approximately 1:1. This lack of selectivity was expected from unspecified chelation of152and both products were useful for the synthesis of analogs. De-N-tritylation and the SN2-type intramolecular cyclization of153or154were effectively realized in a one-pot by reaction with BnSO2Cl in pyridine to give, preferentially, the 5-O-sulfonate which, after treatment with Ac2O gave the desired acetate, which was de-O-acetylated to the nitrogenous D-talose analog155or D-galactose analog156. The analog156was deprotected to thegalactoanalog160of nagstatin (Table 1). The effective de-N-tritylation seemed to be affected by the pyridinium acetate produced. The inversion of the hydroxyl group in155using HN3afforded the azido derivative, which was subjected to hydrogenolysis andN-acetylation, leading to theN-acetyl-D-galactosamine analog157, which corresponded to de-branched nagstatin. Similarly, nitrogenous D-glucose (159), D-mannose (161) andN-acetyl-D-glucosamine (162) analogs were efficiently prepared from an L-xylofuranose derivative. The triazole analogs163and164were predominantly synthesized from the aforesaid152and L-xylofuranose by reaction with lithiated triazole. None)The enantiospecific synthesis of nagstatin (158) was achieved by introduction of an acetic acid unit on157through theC-allylation. None)Synthetic nagstatin (158) was identical with the natural product, confirming the absolute structure. With regard to bioactive compounds, our interest goes far beyond total synthesis methodologies. Thus we have elucidated the mechanism of action of various natural products through detailed investigation of their structure-activity relationships exploiting our synthetic organic analysis. None)For example, the glycosidase inhibiting activities of cyclophellitol (147), 1,6-epi-cyclophellitol (148), nagstatin (158) and their analogs,148-151and157-164, were generally assayed according to the method reported by Saulet al. and are shown in Table 1. None)In dramatic contrast to natural cyclophellitol (147), theepi-epoxide148exhibited inhibiting activity only against alpha-D-glucosidase. The beta-galacto150and alpha-manno151analogs, as expected, showed inhibitory activity against beta-galacto- and alpha-mannosidases, respectively, and the beta-aziridine analog149showed very high inhibitory activity against beta-glucosidase. Structurally, cyclophellitol and its aziridine analog149havequasi-equatorially oriented C1-O and C1-N bonds, which correspond to the equatorial C1-O bond of beta-D-glucopyranosides, whereasepi-cyclophellitol and alpha-mannoanalog151havequasi-axial C1-O bonds, corresponding to the axial C1-O bond of alpha-D-glycopyranosides. Their glycosidase-inhibiting activities emphasized that the alpha- and beta-glycosidases recognized specifically the C1 positions and the residual portions as corresponding to those of alpha- and beta-glycopyranosides. Consequently, these glycosidase inhibitors,147-151, serve as antagonists of the corresponding alpha- and beta-D-glycopyranosides. The nitrogenous alpha-glucosidase inhibitors such as valienamine (173) and validamine (174) were synthesized and found to serve as antagonists of the corresponding alpha-D-glucopyranoside (Scheme 17). None)In fact, a validamine derivative, voglibose (175), was developed and marketed as the anti-diabetes drug "Basen". None)It was also found thatN-acetyl-D-galactosamine analog157exhibited strong bioactivity, even againstN-acetyl-beta-D-glucosaminidase, similar to nagstatin (158). Consequently, it was expected to inhibitN-acetyl-beta-D-galactosaminidase, although this glycosidase is no longer available. Other synthesized analogs,157-164, showed strong inhibitory activity specifically against each of their corresponding beta-D-glycosidases (Table 1). None),None),None)All analogs possess aquasi-equatorially oriented C8a-N1 bond, which corresponds to an equatorial C1-O bond of beta-glycopyranosides, due to the fused imidazole and triazole rings. The configurations from C8a to C5 of the analogs parallel the alignment from C1 to C5 of the corresponding glycopyranosides. Their substrate-specific activities emphasized that the analogs serve essentially as antagonists of the corresponding stereochemically oriented beta-D-glycopyranosides. These findings are similar to those of cyclophellitol and its analogs. Thus, these results demonstrated the theoretical possibility of chemically creating inhibitors against all glycosidases (Table 1). Pyralomicin 1c (172) was isolated from a culture broth ofMicrotetraspora spiralisand found to have novel antitumor properties, including glucosidase-inhibiting activities. None)We therefore synthesized172to confirm the absolute structure (Scheme 17). None)The aglycone, pyralomicinone (170), possesses the 5-hydroxy[1]benzopyrano[2,3-b]pyrrol-4-(1H)-one structure in which the proton on the pyrrole nitrogen is slightly acidic. Thus, Mitsunobu conditions would be suitable for the glycosylation step, which was first developed in our laboratories. None)We had already synthesized170during the first total synthesis of pyralomicin 2c, the glucose analog of172. None)The carba-sugar moiety169was prepared from L-arabinonic acid gamma-lactone165, which was derived from L-arabinose. This methodology had already been developed for synthesis of progesterone receptor ligands, PF1092s in our laboratories,None)and applied to the total synthesis of valienamine (173) and validamine (174). None)The phenylsulfonate166was silylated to the opened chain enolate167in one step by simultaneous formation of an enol silyl ether and anO-silyl secondary alcohol. The SnCl4-promoted aldol condensation of167resulted in the formation of the cyclohexenone168, which was converted to169through the introduction of a hydroxymethyl group. Although169possessed three free hydroxyl groups, the allyl hydroxyl group at C1 was expected to be more reactive than the others. Both components,169and170, were coupled under modified Mitsunobu's conditions to give, predominantly, the desired product171with inversion. Acid deprotection produced pyralomicin 1c, which was identical with the natural product. Recent progress in the total syntheses and development of selected bioactive natural products is reviewed. Most of the total syntheses that have been completed in our laboratories have been the first ever accomplished. Establishment of the total syntheses by use of carbohydrates as chiral sources created a comprehensive method to investigate a variety of bioactive natural products. The achievement of successful results in research is, of course, of prime importance. Yet, prior to undertaking research, it is essential that the objectives of the research are clearly understood and defined. Hence, it may be no exaggeration to say that the selection of target molecules decides, above all, the value of the research itself, particularly with respect to bioactive natural product synthesis. In essence, the author believes that the most important factor is to make the utmost effort towards realizing one's goals, that is, to synthesize a target molecule by one's own concepts and strategies. However, through completion of such enterprise and skill, one can certainly produce the "art", as mentioned in the Introduction, which becomes manifest in the reactions and/or products.