The transition from normal glucose tolerance (NGT) to overt type 2 diabetes is characterized by an intermediate state of prediabetes, termed impaired glucose tolerance (IGT) (1). Insulin resistance and the inability of the beta-cells to adequately compensate through increased insulin secretion characterize the progression to IGT in adults (2,3). Whether alterations in glucose tolerance in youth are similarly characterized is uncertain. Cross-sectional data from our group demonstrated that insulin sensitivity is ~50% lower in obese adolescents with type 2 diabetes than in equally obese control subjects, and first-phase insulin secretion is ~75% lower (4). Obese adolescents with IGT, however, had similar glucose disposal as youth with NGT but significantly lower first-phase insulin secretion and reduced disposition index (DI), a measure of beta-cell function relative to insulin sensitivity (5). Longitudinal data in obese adolescents progressing to IGT suggest that individuals with IGT manifest primary defects in beta-cell function, which is aggravated by declining insulin sensitivity (6,7). Despite this, observations in overweight/obese youth are sparse with respect to beta-cell function and insulin sensitivity across the spectrum of 2-h glycemia from NGT to type 2 diabetes. Moreover, the level of glycemia at which beta-cell dysfunction presents is uncertain. In one study of 4- to 20-year-old obese individuals with NGT, oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT)-derived whole-body insulin sensitivity index declined in subjects with 2-h glucose concentrations =100 mg/dL, and the insulinogenic index was impaired in those with glucose concentrations between 120 and 139 mg/dL compared with those with 2-h glucose concentrations 100 mg/dL (8). Our group recently demonstrated impaired beta-cell function relative to insulin sensitivity within the nondiabetic fasting glucose range in children (9). At the presently accepted cutoff of 100 mg/dL for impaired fasting glucose, there was an ~49% decline in the DI independent of obesity (9). Therefore, the current study of overweight youth investigated the relationship between 2-h OGTT glucose levels and insulin secretion relative to insulin sensitivity using clamp techniques. In addition, oral DI (DIO), shown to predict the development of diabetes in adults (10), was assessed from the OGTT. We hypothesized that beta-cell function relative to insulin sensitivity declines as OGTT 2-h glucose concentrations increase from the normal to the diabetic range. Participants were 147 black, white, and biracial overweight (BMI =85th percentile for age and sex) youth, aged 8 to 20 years, recruited through advertisement. Some participants were reported previously as part of an ongoing grant (11,12). Procedures took place after institutional review board approval, parental written informed consent, and participant assent. Participants were screened by medical history, physical examination, and hematological and biochemical tests (Table 1). All were Tanner stages II-V. Sixty-one female subjects had untreated polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS). None were taking medications known to affect glucose tolerance. Twenty-one participants had type 2 diabetes with negative pancreatic auto antibodies (13). At the time of the evaluation, 7 patients were on lifestyle modification and 14 were on metformin. Metformin was discontinued 48 h before clamp studies (13). Youth on metformin or lifestyle modification were included to assess if despite insulin sensitization beta-cell function contributes to 2-h glucose determination. No other participants were taking medications known to affect glucose tolerance. Characteristics of the participants by categories of 2-h plasma glucose concentration (mg/dL) during the OGTTData are means +/- SE. Groups with the same letter differ significantly (P less than 0.05). NS, not significant. Body composition was assessed using dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (11). Abdominal subcutaneous and visceral adipose tissues were determined at L4-L5 by a computed tomography scan in 111 subjects (11) and a magnetic resonance scan in 36 subjects (14). The change in methodology was dictated by the study section during grant renewal. Participants maintained free-living conditions during the experimental period. None were participating in organized sports. We prescribed a weight-maintaining diet containing 55% carbohydrate, 30% fat, and 15% protein during the investigation. Each participant undertook three tests on separate occasions after a 10- to 12-h overnight fast:1) a 3-h hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic clamp;2) a 2-h hyperglycemic clamp; and3) a 2-h OGTT. In vivo insulin sensitivity was assessed using a 3-h hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic clamp. During the clamp, intravenous crystalline insulin (Humulin; Lilly, Indianapolis, IN) was infused at a constant rate of 80 mU/m2/min (5). Plasma glucose was clamped at 100 mg/dL with a variable-rate infusion of 20% dextrose based on arterialized plasma glucose determined every 5 min. A 2-h hyperglycemic clamp was performed to evaluate first- and second-phase insulin secretion (5,11). In brief, glucose was acutely elevated to 225 mg/dL and clamped at that level with a variable-rate infusion of 20% dextrose in water. Blood samples for insulin were obtained every 2.5 min for the first 15 min and then every 15 min until the end. Participants underwent an OGTT (1.75 g/kg, maximum 75 g) (5). Blood samples were obtained at -15, 0, 15, 30, 60, 90, and 120 min for the measurement of glucose and insulin. Plasma glucose was measured by the glucose oxidase method using a glucose analyzer (Yellow Springs Instruments, Yellow Springs, OH). Plasma insulin was determined by radioimmunoassay (11,13), and HbA1cwas measured by high-performance liquid chromatography (Tosoh Medics) (13). The insulin-stimulated glucose disposal rate was calculated during the last 30 min of the euglycemic clamp to be equal to the rate of exogenous glucose infusion. Peripheral insulin sensitivity was calculated by dividing the insulin-stimulated glucose disposal rate by steady-state plasma insulin concentrations during the last 30 min of the clamp, multiplied by 100 (11,12). During the hyperglycemic clamp, first-phase insulin was calculated as the mean of five determinations every 2.5 min during the first 10 min after the bolus dextrose injection. DI was calculated as the product of insulin sensitivity times first-phase insulin (5,11). Using OGTT data, insulin sensitivity was estimated by 1/fasting insulin (15) and early insulin response, the insulinogenic index, as ? insulin (0-30 min) (uU/mL)/? glucose (0-30 min) (mg/dL) (16,17). DIOwas calculated as the product of 1/fasting insulin * insulinogenic index (? I0-30/? G0-30) (10). Recently, a nonlinear function describing the relationship between the oral glucose-induced early insulin response and insulin sensitivity has been used to assess beta-cell function in both observational (18) and interventional studies in adults (19). Moreover, we chose these OGTT-derived indices of insulin sensitivity and secretion because they correlate well with clamp measures in children (17,20), are easily calculated in epidemiological or intervention studies, and recently have been used to calculate DIOpredicting diabetes development in adults (10). 21). This categorization of accepted ranges for diagnosis of glucose tolerance was chosen to help characterize the glycemic level at which beta-cell dysfunction presents. One-way ANOVA compared group differences in participants, insulin sensitivity, first-phase insulin, DI, 1/fasting insulin, insulinogenic index, and DIO. Two-way ANOVA independently examined the effects of sex and race upon these data. Bonferroni post hocttests were used to identify group differences. Categorical variables (sex, race, Tanner stage, and PCOS) were compared using chi2tests. Stepwise multiple regression assessed the contribution of age, race, Tanner stage, sex, BMI, and DI to 2-h glucose. Data are presented as means +/- SE. Significance was set atP less than 0.05. Participant characteristics are summarized inTable 1. There were no differences in sex, race, age, pubertal development, or the number of girls with PCOS among the groups. Groups had similar body weight, BMI, body composition, and waist circumference. Visceral fat was higher in the group with 2-h glucose concentrations =200 mg/dL compared with concentrations 120 mg/dL. Figure 1shows fasting and 2-h glucose and insulin concentrations and HbA1cby group. Fasting glucose was significantly higher in the group with 2-h glucose concentrations greater than =200 mg/dL compared with all other groups (Fig. 1None). Fasting insulin concentrations differed significantly between groups with the lowest and the highest 2-h glucose (Fig. 1None). The 2-h plasma glucose concentrations differed among groups by design (Fig. 1None). The 2-h insulin concentrations were significantly higher in groups with 2-h glucose concentrations between 120 and less than 200 mg/dL than in those with concentrations less than 120 mg/dL (Fig. 1None). As expected, HbA1cwas significantly higher in the group with a 2-h glucose concentration greater than =200 mg/dL compared with all other groups (Fig. 1None). Fasting glucose (A) and insulin (B), OGTT 2-h glucose (C) and insulin (D), and HbA1c(E) across the groups categorized according to 2-h plasma glucose levels during the OGTT. Pfor ANOVA. Groups with the same letter differ significantly (P less than 0.05). T2DM, type 2 diabetes. Figure 2shows insulin sensitivity from the euglycemic clamp, first-phase insulin from the hyperglycemic clamp, and DI by OGTT 2-h glucose categories. ANOVA across groups showed a significant trend for declining insulin sensitivity (Fig. 2None) and first-phase insulin (Fig. 2None) as 2-h glucose increased, and both differed significantly at the extremes of the glucose categories ( 120 mg/dL vs. =200 mg/dL). After adjusting for age, sex, race/ethnicity, Tanner stage, BMI percentile, and visceral fat using ANCOVA, first-phase insulin remained significantly different (P= 0.002) but not insulin sensitivity (P= 0.439). Adjustment solely for visceral fat (P= 0.225) or BMI percentile (P= 0.078) also removed group differences in insulin sensitivity. Insulin sensitivity from the hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic clamp (A), first-phase insulin concentration from the hyperglycemic clamp (B), and DI (C) in overweight/obese youth categorized by OGTT 2-h plasma glucose levels. UnadjustedPfor ANOVA. ANCOVA adjustedPfor age, sex, race/ethnicity, Tanner stage, BMI percentile, and visceral fat. Groups with the same letter differ significantly (P less than 0.05). DI decreased with increasing 2-h glucose levels and was significantly higher in the group with 2-h plasma glucose concentrations less than 120 mg/dL compared with all other groups (Fig. 2None). Results were similar after adjusting for age, sex, race/ethnicity, Tanner stage, BMI percentile, or BMI and visceral fat. The above analyses were performed after excluding the 61 subjects with PCOS. Results were similar for first-phase insulin and DI, but differences in insulin sensitivity among groups lost significance. Figure 3shows OGTT-derived insulin sensitivity (1/fasting insulin), insulinogenic index, and DIOby 2-h glucose level. Insulin sensitivity did not differ among groups (Fig. 3None). There was a significant trend for the insulinogenic index to decline with increasing 2-h glucose concentrations, and it was highest in the group with 2-h glucose concentrations 120 mg/dL and differed significantly from the group with 2-h glucose concentrations =200 mg/dL (Fig. 3None). DIOin the group with 2-h plasma glucose concentrations less than 120 mg/dL was significantly higher compared with all other categories and declined incrementally (Fig. 3None). After adjusting for age, sex, race/ethnicity, Tanner stage, BMI percentile, and visceral fat, results were unchanged. Insulin sensitivity (1/fasting insulin) (A), insulinogenic index [? insulin(0-30 min)/? glucose(0-30 min)] (B), and DIO(C) calculated from the OGTT in 147 overweight and obese youth categorized by OGTT 2-h plasma glucose levels. UnadjustedPfor ANOVA. ANCOVA adjustedPfor age, sex, race/ethnicity, Tanner stage, BMI percentile, and visceral fat. Groups with the same letter differ significantly (P less than 0.05). Homeostasis model assessment of insulin sensitivity (HOMA-IS) and quantitative insulin sensitivity check index (QUICKI), additional fasting surrogate estimates of insulin sensitivity (20), were calculated to assess if they show the same trend for insulin sensitivity across glucose categories as the clamp. One-way ANOVA demonstrated both variables differed significantly across glucose categories (HOMA-IS:P= 0.023; QUICKI:P less than 0.001). After adjusting for age, sex, race/ethnicity, Tanner stage, BMI percentile, and visceral fat, differences across glucose categories disappeared (HOMA-IS:P= 0.172; QUICKI:P= 0.057). No sex differences were seen for fasting insulin, first-phase insulin, insulinogenic index, clamp DI, or DIO, but clamp insulin sensitivity was significantly lower in female than in male subjects (P less than 0.001), as previously described (22). After excluding female subjects with PCOS, sex differences in insulin sensitivity remained (P= 0.002). First-phase insulin was higher in black than in white subjects (P= 0.021), as previously described (11), but no race differences were seen in insulin sensitivity, DI, fasting insulin, insulinogenic index, or DIO. We did not include biracial participants in this analysis because they numbered only five. Data were similar after excluding female subjects with PCOS. OGTT 2-h glucose correlated with first-phase insulin (r= -0.257,P= 0.002), insulin sensitivity (r= -0.258,P= 0.002), DI (r= -0.436,P less than 0.001), and visceral fat (r= 0.263,P= 0.002) but not age (r= 0.033,P= 0.693), BMI (r= 0.105,P= 0.206), or percentage body fat (r= -0.070,P= 0.414). In multiple regression analysis, with 2-h glucose as the dependent variable and age, sex, race, Tanner stage, BMI, and clamp DI as the independent variables, DI independently explained 19% of the variance in 2-h glucose (DI: partialr= -0.436,P less than 0.001). When BMI was replaced with percentage body fat, fat mass, or visceral fat in the analysis, none significantly predicted 2-h glucose. When participants with PCOS were removed, DI independently explained 23% of the variance (r= -0.484,P less than 0.001) in 2-h glucose. Similar analysis performed with DIOinstead of clamp DI revealed that DIOindependently explained 21% of the variance in 2-h glucose (DIO: partialr= -0.460,P less than 0.001). Our data mirror adult studies. In 6,414 Finnish male subjects from the Metabolic Syndrome in Men Study, OGTT-derived DI decreased by 41% within the normal 2-h plasma glucose range, by 60% with IGT, and by 70% in the diabetes range (23). The San Antonio Metabolism Study found that plasma insulin response in relation to the severity of insulin resistance was impaired at a 2-h plasma glucose concentrations greater than =5.6 mmol/L ( greater than =100 mg/dL), resulting from reduced insulin secretion (21). Others (24) have demonstrated similar findings. Thus, in adults decline in beta-cell function relative to insulin sensitivity with increasing glycemia starts in the normal glucose range. The only pediatric study in obese youth aged 4-20 years with NGT found that those whose 2-h glucose concentrations were 100 mg/dL had greater OGTT-derived DI compared with those whose 2-h glucose concentrations were =100 mg/dL (8). The current study included youth with prediabetes and diabetes and used sensitive and robust clamp methods to demonstrate DI declines further across the IGT and diabetes range. Some participants with type 2 diabetes and 2-h OGTT glucose concentrations =200 mg/dL were on metformin, but despite insulin-sensitizing therapy, in vivo insulin sensitivity was significantly lower than that in the group with glucose concentrations 120 mg/dL, which is consistent with our previous observation (4). Our data suggest that significant decrements in DI are present in overweight youth well before any established diagnostic criteria (19). The OGTT-derived DIOshowed similar findings to the clamp DI, demonstrating that impairments in insulin secretion relative to insulin sensitivity could be detected in high-risk youth at an early stage using OGTT. The OGTT, though less precise than the clamp measurements, is simpler to perform in epidemiological or intervention studies. Moreover, because DIOpredicts the development of future diabetes above and beyond fasting and 2-h glucose in adults (10), it could be used to track risk progression and/or reversal with intervention/prevention trials in obese youth at risk for type 2 diabetes. Although DIOand the insulinogenic index demonstrated similar trends to the clamp measurements, the surrogate measure of insulin sensitivity we used (1/fasting insulin) showed no difference among groups. Other measures of insulin sensitivity (HOMA-IS and QUICKI) showed similar trends to the clamp data. Possibly, 1/fasting insulin may not account for lowered insulin secretion in the face of hyperglycemia that occurs in diabetic or glucose-intolerant subjects (15). Additional investigations need to assess surrogate estimates of insulin sensitivity against clamp measures across the spectrum of glucose tolerance in youth. 25). In summary, our findings demonstrate that impairment in beta-cell function relative to insulin sensitivity, assessed by clamp DI or DIO, is evident even in youth who are considered to have NGT (2-h glucose concentrations 120 to less than 140 mg/dL) under current criteria (1). This impairment worsens as 2-h glucose levels increase. Against this backdrop of metabolically heightened risk for type 2 diabetes, measures to prevent progression from NGT to IGT to type 2 diabetes in obese youth should target beta-cell function alongside insulin sensitization.