Previous work has analyzed kinetochore assembly primarily at endogenous kinetochores, which contain both CENP-C- and CENP-T-based assembly pathways [5-8]. To circumvent the challenge posed by the presence of these dual pathways at endogenous kinetochores, we targeted CENP-C or CENP-T separately to an ectopic chromosomal locus in human cells. For these experiments, we utilized our established assay in which a lac repressor (LacI) fusion protein targets CENP-C or CENP-T to an integrated lac operon (lacO) array in U2OS cells in the absence of the reciprocal protein [6]. We found that the N-terminal 100 amino acids of CENP-C were necessary and sufficient to recruit all KMN network components (KNL1, Mis12 complex, Ndc80 complex) to thelacOarray (Fig. 1A, 1B,S1A), consistent with prior work [6,9-11]. However, despite previous reports that the N-terminal 21 amino acids of CENP-C were sufficient to interact with the Mis12 complex in vitro [10], we found that CENP-C 1-21 was unable to recruit the KMN network to LacI foci in cells (Fig. 1B,S1A). Direct interactions between the CENP-C N-terminus (residues 1-234) and the entire KMN network can also be reconstituted in vitro (Fig. S2A). We next analyzed the requirements for KMN network recruitment downstream of CENP-T. Previous work found that all three KMN network components are recruited to GFP-CENP-T-LacI foci via the N-terminal 375 amino acids of CENP-T (Fig. 1C, 1D, [6]). Although CENP-T binds to the Ndc80 complex directly [5], biochemical experiments cannot recreate robust interactions between CENP-T and the KNL1/Mis12 complex, even with Ndc80 present (Fig. S2B; [5,8]). In addition, the Mis12 complex and N terminus of CENP-T (aa 76-106) bind to the Ndc80 complex in a mutually exclusive manner, precluding assembly of the KMN network in the canonically defined manner [3,5,7,8,12-18]. We found that the first 106 amino acids of CENP-T were sufficient to recruit the Ndc80 complex to thelacOarray (Fig. 1C, 1D), consistent with previous data [5,7]. However, neither the Mis12 complex nor KNL1 were recruited by this CENP-T fragment. A reciprocal truncation (CENP-T residues 107-375) was unable to recruit any KMN network components (Fig. 1C, 1D). A series of additional CENP-T truncations (Fig. 1D,S1B) allowed us to refine the minimal functional region required for the recruitment of the complete KMN network to residues 1-230. This analysis suggests that a conserved domain in the vicinity of amino acids 200-230 in CENP-T (Fig. S1C) is important for KNL1/Mis12 complex recruitment. Therefore, although the KMN network is biochemically stable on its own [3,19,20], the recruitment of KMN network components to CENP-T foci is separable. We next sought to dissect the dependency relationships between KMN network components at CENP-C and CENP-T foci. Prior work analyzing the kinetochore assembly hierarchy downstream of CENP-C [9-11,21] suggested that the Mis12 complex and KNL1 act upstream to recruit the Ndc80 complex [3,21-23]. To define the relationships between KMN components, we performed RNAi depletions and quantified KMN network recruitment to CENP-T-LacI or CENP-C-LacI foci. Consistent with previous models for KMN network organization, we found that KNL1 and the Mis12 complex are interdependent at both CENP-C and CENP-T foci (Fig. 2A, 2B) [3,19]. In addition, we found that depletion of KNL1 or the Mis12 complex subunit Dsn1 led to the loss of the Ndc80 complex at CENP-C-LacI foci (Fig. 2A). In contrast, depletion of the Ndc80 complex subunit Nuf2 did not strongly disrupt the recruitment of KNL1 or Mis12 to CENP-C-LacI foci (Fig. 2A). Partial loss of KNL1/Mis12 complex localization following Nuf2 depletion has been described previously [22] and is consistent with a stabilizing role for the Ndc80 complex in KMN network assembly. These dependency relationships agree with previous analyses of the CENP-C pathway, with Ndc80 complex recruitment occurring downstream of KNL1 and Mis12 (Fig. 2A). In contrast, we found distinct relationships for the KMN network components downstream of CENP-T. KNL1 or Dsn1 depletion resulted in a modest reduction in Ndc80 complex localization (Fig. 2B), suggesting that these proteins are not required for Ndc80 complex recruitment, but may stabilize Ndc80 bound to the CENP-T receptor. Strikingly, depletion of Nuf2 eliminated KNL1 and Mis12 recruitment to CENP-T-LacI foci (Fig. 2B). These data suggest that the Ndc80 complex acts upstream of KNL1 and the Mis12 complex for the CENP-T-based kinetochore assembly pathway (Fig. 2B), such that these functional relationships are inverted relative to the CENP-C-based pathway. To test whether this organization also exists at endogenous kinetochores, we next conducted RNAi experiments in HeLa cells. Co-depletion of CENP-C and CENP-T significantly reduced KMN network localization relative to the individual depletions (Fig. 2C; [6]), consistent with the presence of dual pathways. As we found that the Ndc80 complex was required upstream of KNL1 and the Mis12 complex at CENP-T foci (Fig. 2B), we predicted that depletion of either Ndc80 or CENP-T should cause a similar failure of KNL1/Mis12 complex recruitment. Indeed, co-depletion of CENP-C and the Ndc80 complex subunit Nuf2 resulted in a severe reduction of Mis12 localization to levels equivalent to those observed when both the CENP-T and CENP-C pathways were disrupted directly (Fig. 2C). These data support a model in which KMN network recruitment downstream of CENP-T is promoted by the Ndc80 complex. Although CENP-C and CENP-T are present at centromeres throughout the cell cycle, the KMN network assembles prior to mitotic entry and disassembles at mitotic exit [24]. Therefore, we next assessed the regulation of outer kinetochore assembly downstream of CENP-C and CENP-T. Our previous work highlighted the importance of cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) in promoting the binding and recruitment of the Ndc80 complex to CENP-T [5,6,24]. This work identified residues 76-106 in CENP-T as a key Ndc80 complex binding region [5]. Based on sequence homology, there is a similar motif at amino acids 11-25 in CENP-T. Each motif includes a mapped CDK phosphorylation site (residue T11 or T85) (Fig. 3A, [5,24]). Disrupting these motifs individually through an N-terminal truncation (CENP-T aa 25-375), or using non-phosphorylatable T11A or T85A single mutants, did not prevent KMN network recruitment to the ectopic locus (Fig. 3B, 3C,S3A, S3B). In contrast, a T11A T85A double mutant abrogated recruitment of the KMN network (Fig. 3B, 3C,S3A, S3B). This suggests that both Ndc80 complex binding motifs are functional. However, our data do not distinguish whether a single CENP-T simultaneously recruits two Ndc80 complexes (with incomplete occupancy of these sites), or whether these motifs act together to create a robust binding interface for a single Ndc80 molecule. We next tested the regulation of KNL1 and Mis12 complex localization downstream of CENP-T. Our truncation analysis identified amino acids 200-230 in CENP-T as critical for KNL1 and Mis12 complex recruitment (Fig. 1D,S1B). Therefore, we generated a phospho-inhibitory mutation in the neighboring CDK phosphorylation site, T195 (Fig. 3A). Although Ndc80 complex localization to CENP-T T195A mutant foci was largely unaffected (Fig. 3C), the levels of KNL1/Mis12 were strongly reduced (Fig. 3B, 3C,S3A, S3B). Despite the importance in vivo of phosphorylation of T11, T85, and T195, phospho-mimetic mutations cannot reconstitute robust interactions between CENP-T and the complete KMN network in vitro (Fig. S2B). Finally, we tested the effect of altering KMN network recruitment downstream of CENP-T on chromosome segregation. Due to the integration oflacOin the arm of chromosome 1 in these cell lines, ectopic targeting of the CENP-T-LacI fusion creates a dicentric-like chromosome that strongly perturbs chromosome segregation [6,27]. This behavior results in the accumulation of GFP foci [27], but is suppressed by the addition of IPTG to disrupt thelacO/LacI interaction. Cells expressing GFP-LacI as a control displayed a single focus in each cell, consistent with proper chromosome segregation (Fig. 3D, 3E). In contrast, after removal of IPTG from the growth media for 72 hours, ~50% of cells expressing the wild type or T195A GFP-CENP-T-LacI construct had greater than 1 focus, indicating chromosome mis-segregation (Fig. 3D, 3E). However, CENP-T T11A, T85A, and T11A T85A mutants showed attenuated defects (Fig. 3E), consistent with their reduced ability to recruit the KMN network (Fig. 3C,S3B). Together, these data indicate that CDK regulates the interaction of CENP-T with the KMN network at multiple distinct sites, with functional consequences for chromosome segregation. We next analyzed the regulation of the CENP-C pathway. Aurora B kinase, which plays a key role in controlling kinetochore-microtubule attachments [28], has been implicated in kinetochore assembly inXenopus laevis[29] and budding yeast [30]. Although we previously observed that Aurora B inhibition in HeLa cells resulted in only a modest defect in kinetochore assembly [31], we considered that this defect might be magnified when the CENP-C and CENP-T-based assembly pathways were analyzed separately. Indeed, treatment with the Aurora B inhibitor ZM447439 significantly reduced localization of all KMN network components to CENP-C-LacI foci (Fig. 4A). In contrast, Ndc80 complex recruitment to the CENP-T-LacI focus was unaffected by ZM447439 treatment (Fig. 4B). However, we observed significant loss of KNL1 and Mis12 complex localization to the CENP-T-LacI focus, suggesting that Aurora B phosphorylation may play a role in stabilizing the Mis12/KNL1 interaction, or contribute to KNL1 and Mis12 complex recruitment downstream of CENP-T.We next tested the role of Aurora B in regulating endogenous kinetochore assembly. We reasoned that if Aurora B promotes kinetochore assembly downstream of CENP-C, the effect of Aurora B inhibition would be magnified in the absence of the CENP-T-based assembly pathway. Indeed, combining CENP-T RNAi and ZM447439 treatment led to an enhanced reduction in Mis12 complex localization relative to the individual treatments (Fig. 4C). In contrast, combining CENP-C RNAi and ZM447439 treatment did not lead to a further reduction in Mis12 complex localization relative to CENP-C depletion alone (Fig. 4C). Aurora B kinase directly phosphorylates KNL1, Ndc80, and the Mis12 complex subunit Dsn1 [31]. However, phosphorylation of KNL1 regulates its interactions with PP1 [32] and microtubules [31], and Ndc80 phosphorylation regulates its interactions with microtubules [3,33]. Therefore, we evaluated the contribution of Aurora B phosphorylation of Dsn1 for promoting Mis12 complex localization. To test this, we analyzed a GFP-Dsn1 mutant in which the mapped Aurora B phosphorylation sites were mutated to aspartic acid (SD) to mimic constitutive phosphorylation [31]. This mutant localized to mitotic kinetochores similarly to wild type Dsn1. However, we found that the GFP-Dsn1 SD mutant displayed enhanced localization to G1 and G2 kinetochores (Fig. 4D). This increased G1 localization was not affected by CENP-T depletion, but was strongly compromised following CENP-C depletion (Fig. S4). In contrast, we previously reported that the corresponding GFP-Dsn1 phospho-inhibitory mutant had minimal effects on its mitotic kinetochores localization [31], suggesting that additional interactions promote mitotic Mis12 complex recruitment. In addition, the KMN network is able to interact with CENP-C in vitro regardless of its phosphorylation state (Fig. S1A; data not shown; [10]). Together, these data suggest Aurora B kinase promotes the recruitment of the KMN network to kinetochores, particularly downstream of CENP-C. Despite the identification of more than 100 different components of the human kinetochore, defining the basic kinetochore architecture remains an ongoing challenge. In particular, it was unclear how kinetochore components assemble downstream of the recently defined CENP-C- and CENP-T-based pathways. Here, we demonstrated that these two pathways are not simply duplications, but rather each pathway displays distinct regulation and functional relationships for KMN network recruitment (Fig. 4E). Recent work from Kim and Yu [34] also identified similar differences in the behavior and regulation of these pathways. When tested separately at the ectopic focus, CENP-T and CENP-C are capable of independently recruiting the entire KMN network. However, it remains to be determined how the two pathways interact when both are present at endogenous kinetochores. For example, the KMN network components may be recruited independently by CENP-C and CENP-T, or a KMN unit may simultaneously interact with both receptors (Fig. 4E). We also cannot rule out the possibility that additional kinetochore components contribute to the recruitment of KNL1 and the Mis12 complex downstream of CENP-T at endogenous kinetochores. In summary, our work has uncovered a complex architecture for the core kinetochore components.