The most widely used method for reconstruction of large bone defects is a vascularized free bone graft; although it requires longer and more involved. Vascularized free bone grafts can cause donor site impediment and carry a high risk of failing to find vessels for microanastomosis in patients who have received radiation therapy. In addition, osseous flaps have esthetic and functional disadvantages due to morphological differences from recipient bone. To overcome these limitations, reconstruction using removed autogenous bone after autoclaving is employed as an alternative method for segmental defects[1]. This method is advantageous because antigenicity is no longer a problem and the anatomical form of the bone defect is reproducible. However, autoclaved autogenous bone (AAB) has some limitations. It is only osteoconductive, not osteoinductive[2]. Segmental bone defects have been reconstructed with AAB in orthopedics for nearly a century; however, AAB acts as a tolerated foreign body, gradually getting resorbed and sometimes causing infection or nonunion[3-6]. There have been attempts in recent years to increase the engraftment rate of AAB by incorporating proteins such as recombinant human fibro-blast growth factor-2[7]. However, incorporation of recombinant human bone morphogenetic protein (rhBMP)-2 has not been attempted. BMP-2 is involved in the process of differentiation of osteoblasts and chondroblasts from mesenchymal stem cells, suggesting that BMP-2 induces adult bone formation and chondrogenesis, consequently increasing the recovery rate from skeletal defects and reducing infection rates[7-10]. However, the high production cost of rhBMPs from Chinese hamster ovary cells has limited commercial use. After several attempts using prokaryotic expression systems, researchers found rhBMPs isolated fromEscherichia coli(ErhBMPs) were 98% pure, adequate for bone regenerationin vivo, and producible in commercial quantities at low prices. Furthermore, their effects on bone formation have been validated in rat calvarial and fibular defect models[11-13]. This osteoinductive protein could increase the engraftment rate of AAB, which acts as a scaffold to maintain initial strength in segmental defects. The clinical efficacy of rhBMPs may depend on the carrier system used to ensure an effective delivery of adequate protein concentrations to the desired site. Two different delivery systems are available: absorbable collagen sponge (ACS) and fibrin glue (FG). Therefore, this study aims to validate the effect of ErhBMP-2, delivered with the ACS or FG, on engraftment of AAB in a critical-sized, segmental bone defect model of the rabbit radius. Twelve adolescent female New Zealand white rabbits weighing 3.5 to 4.5 kg were used. All steps of the experiment were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of the Department of Laboratory Animal Medicine, Medical Research Center, Yonsei University College of Medicine (2010-0264). Radial injuries were created on 24 sites in the 12 animals. The animal was placed in a true lateral position on the surgery table and the foreleg shaved after orotracheal intubation (Fig. 1A). The leg was scrubbed with Betadine, and local anesthesia with lidocaine (1.8 mL containing 1:100,000 epinephrine) was injected. A longitudinal skin incision of 3 cm and supraperiosteal dissection were performed (Fig. 1B). Segmental bone (2 cm in size) was harvested with a soft tissue cuff at bilateral radii (Fig. 1C,1D). The osteotomies were created with a thin fissure bur (#701). Resected bone fragments were cut in half longitudinally, then part of the bone marrow and all soft tissues covering the bone were removed (Fig. 1E,1F). The remaining cortical bone was autoclaved at 123 degrees C, 0.2 MPa for 10 minutes. The prepared AAB was then replanted and fixed with two microplates and eight screws (Biomaterials America Inc., New York, NY, USA). After copious saline irrigation, the deep fascial layer was reapproximated as an envelope around the AAB with 3-0 PolysorbTM(Covidien, Mansfield, MA, USA) followed by subcutaneous layer sutures using the same material and skin sutures using 4-0 DermalonTM(Covidien). Antibiotic treatment was maintained for five days after the operation and the stitches removed after 10 days. The animals were divided into three groups, with eight sites allotted to each group. Group 1 (control): Only AAB was replanted and fixed (Table 1,Fig. 1G). Group 2: AAB was replanted with 50mug ErhBMP-2 at a concentration of 1.0 mg/mL (BioAlpha Inc., Seongnam, Korea), incorporated in a 2*4*20 mm-sized ACS (Teruplug(r), Terumo Co., Tokyo, Japan) (Fig. 1H). Group 3: AAB was replanted with 50mug ErhBMP-2 at a concentration of 1.0 mg/mL (BioAlpha Inc.), incorporated in FG (Tisseel(r); Baxter, Wien, Austria). Animals were sacrificed at weeks six and 12 after surgery. Plain x-ray images of both radius injury sites were compared. Three-dimensional images were obtained using micro-computed tomography (Micro-CT, Skyscan 1076; SKYSCAN, Konitch, Belgium), and the bone fraction volume (BV/TV), trabecular thickness (TbTh), trabecular number (TbN), and trabecular separation (TbSp) were measured using analysis software (CTAn, SKYSCAN) at the proximal and distal ends of the AAB with a region of interest of 100mum (Fig. 2). The amount of bony union at both ends of AAB was observed in coronal sections of the Micro-CT.Resected tissue was fixed at 4 degrees C in 4% paraformalde-hyde/0.01 M phosphate-buffered saline (pH 7.4) for 24 hours, and demineralized at room temperature with formic acid-sodium formate. After embedding in paraffin, the tissue was cut in the direction of the long axis of the radius at a thickness of 7mum, stained with hematoxylin and eosin, and observed using optical microscopy. Slides were scanned by digital virtual microscope (BX51; Olympus(r), Tokyo, Japan) and analyzed with the master program. For quantitative analysis, the perimeter of each entire graft was measured at low magnification, with the presence of fusion being judged by observing osteoid, including the osteocyte and reversal line at high magnification (Fig. 3). The proportion of united perimeter within the AAB perimeter was measured to calculate the degree of engraftment. Subjects whose graft shapes were unclear on the slide were excluded from measurement. Quantitative data were reported as the mean+/-standard deviation. Statistical analysis was performed using a one-way analysis of variance (one-way ANOVA) with statistical significance evaluated atP less than 0.05 and using the PASW Statistics ver. 18.0 (IBM Co., Armonk, NY, USA). In plain radiography, AABs in the control group united with the radius at only one site, either the proximal or distal cut ends, six weeks after operation. Both graft sites united with the radius in group 2, whereas neither site did in group 3. Twelve weeks after surgery, new bone formation was observed on both AAB sites in the control group and group 3, but complete bony fusion in both ends of AAB was observed only in group 2 (Fig. 4). At 6 weeks, the BT/TV, TbTh, and TbSp were highest in group 1, lower in group 2, and even lower in group 3. TbN was highest in group 2, lower in group 1, and even lower in group 3. All twelfth week indices were highest in group 2, followed by 3 and 1, except for TbTh (Table 2). Coronal images of Micro-CT showed newly formed trabecular bone united with the AAB and radius in group 2, while AAB was surrounded by little osteoid without trabecular pattern in groups 1 and 3 at week 6. In groups 1 and 3, one of the two graft ends regained fusion between the AAB and cortex of radius, whereas in group 2 both sides of the cut ends regained fusion with the trabecular bone at 12 weeks (Fig. 5). Although woven bone originated from the adjacent ulnar bone and a reversal line, suggesting bony remodeling, was observed six weeks after surgery in groups 1 and 3 (Fig. 6A,6B), the new bone did not unite with the AAB. High magnification revealed extensive cartilage formation around the AAB, active cell division of chondroblasts, and replacement of cartilage by osteoid in group 2 (Fig. 6C). Some osteoclasts and osteoblasts were observed, suggestive of bony remodeling. Twelve weeks after surgery in group 1 (Fig. 6D), woven bone originated from a single end of the radial bone and restored some continuity with the AAB. Sparse new bone formation and a reversal line suggested proper engraftment of AAB. In group 2 (Fig. 6E), woven bone originated from the adjacent cutting ends of the radius and showed complete fusion with AAB. At low magnification, AAB had completely restored continuity with the radial bone marrow. Moreover, high magnification revealed reversal lines and osteocytes inside the woven bone, suggesting that active bony remodeling was in progress. In group 3 (Fig. 6F), there was some evidence suggesting bony remodeling around AAB, similar to the group 1 results, although not as extensive as in group 2. The proportion of bony union area was highest in group 2 at the 12th week but lowest in group 3, which used FG as the carrier material. Engraftment degree was measurable in three specimens of group 1 and group 2 at the sixth week and group 2 and group 3 at the twelfth week. However, only two specimens were able to be measured for engraftment degree in group 3 at the sixth week and group 1 at the 12th week. The AAB engraftment was highest in group 2 at both six and 12 weeks and lowest in group 3 at 12 weeks (Table 3). The results of this study suggest that ErBMP-2 is remarkably effective for engraftment of AAB when used in conjunction with an ACS as carrier material, but rarely effective with FG. We used the radius as a segmental defect model. The radius was selected as a rabbit long bone model in this experiment for the following reasons: it is smaller than the ulnar bone, bears less load, and is easily accessible. A radial bone defect of critical size (20 mm) was formed in the rabbit, as in previous studies[14-16]. We followed the surgical protocols of Huberet al. [17]. The conventional method of quantitative analysis could not be applied in this model because of great differences in AAB volumes and screw-based defects, producing too much variability in volume and position for quantification. Thus it was necessary to use a new method of measuring the proportion of bony union in this study. However, not all subjects could be included in this quantitative analysis because longitudinal cutting of some radial bones failed to show the entire graft bone cross-section. Eight subjects whose graft shapes were unclear on the slide were excluded from measurement. Although some measurement errors arose due to screw fixation defects using this method, the intra-group differences among the proportions of bony fusion were no greater than the inter-group differences measured (0% to 87%). Only one subject in group 2 showed a relatively low proportion of bony fusion (3.16%) six weeks after surgery (Fig. 6B), although active chondrogenesis was observed around the AAB despite a low degree of engraftment. This suggests that regenerated bone may unite with the AAB afterward. This study's method of assessing the proportion of bony union using the perimeter of graft may be useful in future quantitative analyses of AAB graft results. Graft bone union can be achieved in three ways: new bone deposition on the periosteum, at the endosteal surface of the adjacent host bone, and osteogenesis from the graft bone[18]. The authors removed the soft tissue cuff when resecting the segmental bone to make an environment similar to periosteum removal due to an invading tumor. Heat-treatment at 100 degrees C destroys bone collagen, thus eliminating osteoconductive activity[6]. Therefore, heat-treated autogenous bone is united mainly by new bone deposition on the endosteal surface of the adjacent host bone when the periosteum is lost, leading to delayed healing with a high risk of engraftment failure. Autoclaving is a useful method for preventing local recurrence of malignant bone tumors[19]. Zellin[7] reported that revitalization of replanted autoclaved grafts was significantly affected by local delivery of recombinant human fibroblast growth factor-2. In this study, 50mug of ErhBMP-2 was used, based on reports that a rhBMP-2 dosage exceeding 30mug did not affect the amount of bone formation in segmental long bone defects of rabbits, although varying dosages have been used depending on the experimental models and type of BMPs[15]. Typically rhBMP-2 diffuses rapidly and this supraphysiological concentration may result in some complications[20-25]. Adequate delivery systems, which enable localized and controlled release of protein, are under investigation, although most are produced with complex methods. ACS and FG are the most popular and inexpensive delivery systems for rhBMP-2, although they have disadvantages[13,26-32]. Rigid fixation is not recommended in the rabbit radius defect model because it is unnecessary for bony union and can cause delayed healing due to occlusion of the bone marrow. The authors fixed the AAB rigidly using metal plates and screws to create an environment similar to the segmental bony defect, which should induce early migration and adhesion of osteoblasts[17]. The small dimensions of the radial bone and thin cortical bone made it difficult to fix the AAB with plates and screws, causing some fractures and loss of cortical bone while screwing. As a carrier, FG prevents bone ingrowth by controlling BMP diffusion and BMP stimulated bone growth[33]. In this experiment, the ErhBMP-2 may have been partially lost when the fibrin block was transferred to the defect site. Conversely, injection of a mixture of FG and rhBMP-2 promotes healing in a bone-tendon injury[34]. FG could serve as a carrier material in future systems where ErhBMP-2 dissolves properly and elutes without loss. Although AAB incorporating ErhBMP-2 was expected to recover mechanical strength soon after reconstruction because it reproduces the original anatomy and minimizes bony defects in cutting ends, mechanical testing of AAB could not be conducted in this study. The radius cannot be separated from the ulnar bone due to their proximity in the rabbit. However, part of the woven bone derived from ulnar bone would be lost in the process of separation, possibly rendering the subsequent histologic assessment inaccurate. Future mechanical strength tests of AAB after bony reconstruction should include comparisons with experiments that did not use AAB in the reconstruction. Further research is also necessary to examine the effectiveness of AAB in maxillofacial reconstructions, such as the mandible, under controlled trials. The results of this study suggest ErBMP-2 is remarkably effective for engraftment of AAB when used in conjunction with the ACS as a carrier material, but is rarely effective with FG. When comparing bone formation in control and experimental groups, more new bone was observed in the control group six weeks after surgery, while by the twelfth week it became highly noticeable in group 2. In terms of replanted and adjacent bone, group 2 showed the best continuity compared to groups 1 and 3 at the end of the observation period, suggesting that ErhBMP-2 increases bony healing when applied on an AAB graft site. In addition, we reconfirmed the effectiveness of the ACS as a delivery system for ErhBMP-2.