Cytosine methylation by DNA methyltransferasesNone-Noneto form 5-methylcytosine (5mC)Noneis important in epigenetic regulation of the eukaryotic genome. None,NoneThe reconversion of 5mC to cytosine during active demethylationNone-Noneinvolves the stepwise oxidation of 5mC. Oxidation of 5mC to 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC)None,None,Noneis accomplished by ten-eleven translocation (TET) dioxygenasesNone,None-Noneand occurs in response to oxidative stress as a consequence of UV radiation. NoneFurther oxidation of 5hmC by TET dioxygenases forms 5-formylcytosine (5fC)Noneand 5-carboxylcytosine (5caC). None,None,None-None,NoneThese have been detected in cellular DNA. None,NoneBoth 5fC and 5caC, but not 5hmC, are substrates for thymine DNA glycosylase (TDG),Noneconsistent with the greater abundance of 5hmC in mammalian tissuesNoneand implicating catalyzed base excision of oxidized 5mC derivatives in active demethylation. The differential processing of 5fC and 5caC vs 5hmC by TDG could be mediated by their differential recognition in DNA. Recently, Raiber et al. Nonereported that a DNA dodecamer containing three 5fC sites in an iterated CG repeat sequence exhibited 5fC-specific helical unwinding, due to specific changes in the geometry of the grooves and base pairs involving 5fC. DNA glycosylases may also exploit differential base pair opening rates as a basis for substrate recognition. For example, enhanced base pair opening rates at A:U base pairs facilitate the recognition of uracil by uracil DNA glycosylase (UDG). NoneIt has also been hypothesized that TDG recognizes wobble base pairing geometry at oxidized cytosines,None,None,None,None,Noneas the imino tautomers of 5caC or 5fC may adopt wobble-like base pairs with the complementary G.None,NoneHowever, calculations of the stabilities of the amino and imino tautomers of 5fC and 5caC at the nucleobase level have suggested that, when paired with G, both 5fC and 5caC, which are substrates for TDG,Nonepreferentially form Watson-Crick pairs. NoneAlternatively, as proposed by Maiti et al.,Nonethe differential processing by TDG could be mediated by differences in the corresponding transition state catalytic complexes involving 5fC, 5caC, or 5hmC. Maiti et al. Noneproposed that the preferential excision of 5fC and 5caC by TDG is facilitated by the presence of electron-withdrawing substituents at the C5 carbon for these two oxidized cytosines. This electron-withdrawing effectNone,Nonewould be anticipated to stabilize developing negative charge in the transition state complex for base excision. Here, we have incorporated 5hmC, 5fC, or 5caC into the 5'-T8X9G10-3' sequence of the self-complementary Dickerson-Drew dodecamer (DDD),None,Nonewhich contains the 5'-CG-3' sequence associated with genomic cytosine methylation, forming DDDhm, DDDf, and DDDcaduplexes (Chart1), respectively. Importantly, the DDD is amenable to crystallographicNone-Noneand spectroscopicNone-Noneanalyses. The characterization of the DDDhm, DDDf, and DDDcaduplexes by thermal melting studies, measurements of base pair opening dynamics, crystallography, and NMR reveals lesion- and sequence-specific differences among 5hmC, 5fC, or 5caC in the 5'-T8X9G10-3' sequence, which may be relevant to their recognition by TDG. Relative to 5hmC and 5fC, incorporation of 5caC increases the stability of the DDD. This is reflected in reduced base pair opening dynamics for DDDca, as compared to that for DDDhmand DDDf, at neighboring base pair A5:T8. Similar, but smaller, differences in base pair opening dynamics are observed at the oxidized base pair G4:X9, whereas minimal effects are observed at neighboring base pair C3:G10. No evidence for wobble base pairing interactions involving the oxidized cytosines is observed; each of these oxidized cytosines favors Watson-Crick base pairing. These sequence-specific differences in the DDD may be related to the recognition of these oxidized cytosines by TDG. However, they differ from the sequence-specific effects observed by Raiber et al. Nonefor an iterated CG repeat containing three 5fC sites. Moreover, they do not correlate with the differential ability of TDG to excise 5fC and 5caC vs 5hmC,Nonewhich may be mediated by differences in the transition state complex for base excision. NoneNoneIn solution, the two strands of the DDD exhibit pseudo-dyad symmetry. NMR resonances of symmetry-related nucleotides in the two strands are not individually observed. In the crystal, corresponding nucleotides from paired strands are not symmetry-related, and nucleotides are numbered individually. DDDm, DDDhm, DDDf, and DDDcarefer to the DDD containing 5mC, 5hmC, 5fC, and 5caC, respectively. Oligodeoxynucleotides were synthesized by Midland Certified Reagent Co. (Midland, TX) and purified by anion-exchange HPLC. The DDDhmduplex was prepared with an Expedite 8909 DNA synthesizer (PerSeptive Biosystems) on a 1 mumol scale using ethylcyanide-protected 5-hydroxymethyl-dC, phenoxyacetyl-protected dA, 4-isopropyl-phenoxyacetyl-protected dG, acetyl-protected dC, and dT phosphoramidites and solid supports (Glen Research, Inc., Sterling, VA). The modified phosphoramidite was incorporated by removing the column from the synthesizer and sealing it with two syringes, one of which contained 250-300 muL of the manufacturer's1H-tetrazole activator solution (1.9-4.0% in CH3CN, v/v) and the other contained 250 muL of the modified phosphoramidite solution (15 mg in anhydrous CH3CN). The1H-tetrazole and the phosphoramidite solutions were sequentially drawn through the column (1H-tetrazole first), and this procedure was repeated over 30 min. The column was washed with anhydrous CH3CN and returned to the synthesizer for capping, oxidation, and detritylation steps. The deprotection was accomplished with 30% NH4OH for 17 h at 75 degrees C.Oligodeoxynucleotides were purified by semipreparative HPLC at 260 nm (Atlantis, Waters Corporation, C18, 5 mum, 250 mm * 10.0 mm). The column was equilibrated either with 30 mM sodium phosphate (pH 7.0) (for DDDm, DDDhm, DDDca) or 0.1 M ammonium formate (pH 6.5) (for DDDf). The gradient was 1-15% CH3CN over 20 min, 15-80% CH3CN over 5 min, and 1% CH3CN over 5 min, at 4.5 mL/min. Oligodeoxynucleotides were desalted by passing over G-25 Sephadex (GE Healthcare, Little Chalfont, Buckinghamshire, UK). Oligodeoxynucleotides were characterized by MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry (calcd for DDD [M - H]-m/z3646.4, foundm/z3647.8; calcd for DDDm[M - H]-m/z3660.5, found 3663.4; calcd for DDDhm[M - H]-m/z3675.5, found 3679.7; calcd for DDDf[M - H]-m/z3674.4, found 3673.2; calcd for DDDca[M - H]-m/z3690.4, found 3693.1). Oligodeoxynucleotides were prepared in 100 mM NaCl, 50 muM Na2EDTA, in 10 mM sodium phosphate (pH 7.0), heated at 85 degrees C for 15 min, and annealed by cooling to room temperature. Duplex concentrations were determined by UV absorbance, using extinction coefficients calculated at 260 nm. NoneThe concentration of DNA was 1.2 muM. Measurements were conducted in 100 mM NaCl, 50 muM Na2EDTA, in 10 mM sodium phosphate (pH 7.0). The temperature was increased from 10 to 80 degrees C at 1 degrees C/min. Tmvalues were calculated from first-order derivatives of 260 nm absorbance vs temperature profiles. NoneSpectra were obtained at 900 MHz using a 5 mm cryogenic probe (Bruker Biospin Inc., Billerica, MA). Oligodeoxynucleotides were prepared at a duplex concentration of 0.25 mM in 180 muL of 100 mM NaCl, 50 muM Na2EDTA, 11 mM NaN3, in 10 mM sodium phosphate (pH 7.0). The samples were exchanged with D2O and dissolved in 180 muL of 99.996% D2O to observe nonexchangeable protons. NOESYNonespectra were collected in 99.996% D2O to observe nonexchangeable protons. The temperature was 15 degrees C. TPPI quadrature detection was used, and data were collected at a mixing time of 250 ms. The relaxation delay was 2.0 s. Data were recorded with 2k real points in thet2dimension and 1k real points in thet1dimension. Spectra were zero-filled during processing to create a 2k * 2k matrix. Chemical shifts were referenced to the chemical shift of water at the corresponding temperature, with respect to 4,4-dimethyl-4-silapentane-1-sulfonic acid (DSS). To observe exchangeable protons, samples were prepared in 9:1 H2O/D2O. For observation of imino protons, spectra were recorded at 5, 15, 25, 35, 45, and 55 degrees C. NOESY spectra were collected at 5 degrees C with 70 or 250 ms mixing times and relaxation delay of 2.0 s. Water suppression was achieved by the Watergate pulse sequence. NoneData were processed with TOPSPIN (2.0.b.6, Bruker Biospin Inc., Billerica, MA). NMR data were collected at 500 MHz using a 5 mm cryogenic probe, at 15 degrees C. Samples were in 180 muL of 9:1 H2O/D2O containing 100 mM NaCl, 50 muM Na2EDTA, 11 mM NaN3, 1 mM triethanolamine, in 10 mM sodium phosphate (pH 8.9). None-NoneThe presence of triethanolamine enabled the pH of the sample to be monitored during the titration,in situ, by measuring the chemical shift difference between the two methylene groups. NoneMagnetization transfer from water to the imino protons was followed by observation of the imino proton resonances after variable mixing times. None,NoneSelective spin inversion of the water protons was achieved with a 2 ms 180 degrees sinc pulse with 1000 points. To minimize effects of radiation damping during the mixing time, a 0.1 G cm-1gradient was used. Water suppression was achieved by a binominal 1-1 echo sequence, jump and return,Nonewith flanking 1 ms smooth square shape gradients, 15 G cm-1. Sixteen values of the delay ranging form 1 ms to 15 s were used. Data were processed in TOPSPIN. Ammonia, pKaof 9.2 at 15 degrees C, was the proton acceptor. NoneData analyses were performed using PRISM (v. 6.0b, GraphPad Software, Inc., La Jolla, CA). Exchange rates were calculated using established methods. None,NoneIn order to determine rates of base pair opening, exchange rates were plotted against concentrations of the active form of the ammonia base catalyst. Equilibrium constants for base pair opening were calculated by fitting exchange rate data as a function of ammonia concentration. NoneCrystals were grown at 18 degrees C over 8 to 16 days by hanging-drop vapor diffusion, using the nucleic acid mini-screen (Hampton Research, Aliso Viejo, CA). Droplets of 2 muL containing 1.2 mM duplex in precipitant solution were equilibrated against 0.75 muL of 35% MPD. The solution compositions are summarized in Table S1 in theSupporting Information. Single crystals were mounted in nylon loops and flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen. For DDDhm, data were collected on the 19-ID beamline of the Structural Biology Center at the Advanced Photon Source (APS) of Argonne National Laboratory (ANL, Argonne, IL). NoneThe wavelength was 0.9794 A. Initial indexing and scaling of diffraction images and further reflection merging was done using HKL3000. NoneTo ensure completeness of the data, two passes were collected. For DDDca, data were collected on the 24-IDC beamline of the Northeastern Collaborative Access Team (NE-CAT) at the APS (ANL). The wavelength was 0.97920 A. Initial indexing and scaling of diffraction images, together with reflection merging, were done using XDSNone,Noneand SCALANonein the CCP4Nonesuite as part of the RAPD data collection strategy at NE-CAT. For DDDf, data were collected on the 21-IDD beamline of the Life-Sciences Collaborative Access Team (LS-CAT) at the APS (ANL). The wavelength was 1.000 A. Initial indexing and scaling of diffraction images, together with reflection merging were done in HKL2000. NoneDetails are shown in Table1. Rmerge= ? None? None|Ii- ? I?|/? None? None|? I?|, whereIiis the intensity for theith measurement of an equivalent reflection with indicesh,k, andl. Structures were determined by molecular replacement using the DDD as the search model (PDB ID code 436D). NoneMolecular replacement searches were completed with MOLREPNone,Nonein the CCP4 suite. NoneAn initial model was checked and rebuilt in COOT. NoneThe model was rebuilt and further refined using REFMAC. None,NoneFinal models were refined against all reflections, except for 5% randomly selected reflections used for monitoringRfree. The refinement statistics are presented in Table1. Complete structure factors and data coordinates were deposited in the Protein Data Bank (http://pdb.org): PDB ID code 4I9V for DDDhm, 4QC7 for DDDf, and 4PWM for DDDca. The impact of placing 5hmC, 5fC, or 5caC site specifically into the 5'-CG-3' sequence was investigated by incorporating each oxidized cytosine into the 5'-T8X9G10-3' sequence of the DDD. None,NoneTheTmvalues of the duplexes were obtained in 100 mM NaCl at pH 7. They were compared to both the unmodified DDD and also to the DDD containing 5mC in the 5'-T8X9G10-3' sequence (DDDm). TheTmof the DDD duplex was 48 degrees C, theTmof the DDDmduplex was 46 degrees C, theTmof the DDDhmduplex was 48 degrees C, and theTmof the DDDfduplex was 46 degrees C. These small differences inTmsuggested that the presence of 5mC or of the oxidized cytosines 5hmC or 5fC in the 5'-T8X9G10-3' sequence did not greatly affect theTmof the DDD. In contrast, theTmof the DDDcaduplex increased to 54 degrees C. NMR spectra of the exchangeable guanine N1H and thymine N3H imino protons were recorded from 5-55 degrees C (Figure1). The resonances were assigned using standard methods. NoneFor the DDDcaduplex, the G4N1H proton remained sharp at 55 degrees C, consistent with the increasedTmvalue associated with the 5caC nucleobase in the 5'-T8X9G10-3' sequence. At the neighbor A5:T8base pair, the T8N3H resonance remained detectable at 55 degrees C, although it exhibited broadening. At the neighbor C3:G10base pair, the G3N1H resonance remained detectable at 55 degrees C, also exhibiting broadening. The stabilizing effect extended two base pairs in each direction, also including the imino protons of base pairs G2:C11and A6:T7. In contrast, for the DDDhmduplex at the oxidized G4:X9base pair, the G4N1H resonance was severely broadened at 55 degrees C. Likewise, the corresponding resonance in the DDDfduplex was severely broadened at 55 degrees C. At the neighboring base pair C3:G10, the G10N1H resonance in the DDDfduplex broadened at 35 degrees C. The T8N3H resonances broadened at 45 degrees C in the DDDfduplex and at 55 degrees C in the DDDhmduplex. The temperature dependence of line widths of the imino resonances is shown in Figure S1 of theSupporting Information. 1H NMR of imino proton resonances as a function of temperature for (A) DDD, (B) DDDm, (C) DDDhm, (D) DDDf, and (E) DDDca. Data were collected at 900 MHz. Magnetization transfer from water after variable times was followed by observation of the guanine N1H and thymine N3H resonances, at 15 degrees C. The imino proton exchange rates were measured in the absence and the presence of added ammonia base catalyst. None,None,None,None,None,NoneThe exchange with water follows a two-state model, where the base pair undergoes a conformational change from the closed to the open state, from which proton exchange occurs. None,NoneThe open base pair is exchange-competent because the proton is accessible to acceptors in solution. As described by Russu and co-workers,None-Nonein the EX1 regime, the concentration of acceptors is sufficient for rapid exchange from the open state (kex,open? kcl), so exchange occurs at each opening event andkex=kop. In the EX2 regime, where the concentration of base is low (kex,open? kcl), the rate of exchange from the open state is proportional to the exchange rate and the concentration of the acceptor. None-NoneFigure2shows the results for the C3:G10, G4:X9, A5:T8, and A6:T7base pairs of the DDDhm, DDDf, and DDDcaduplexes. They were compared to both the unmodified DDD and to the DDDmduplexes. Plots of exchange rates as a function of ammonia concentration suggested that the EX1 regimeNone-Nonewas attained. Consistent with the results of Moe et al.,Nonethe rates of imino proton exchange were lower for G:C base pairs C3:G10and G4:X9and greater for A:T base pairs A5:T8and A6:T7. At 15 degrees C, the oxidized cytosines differentially altered exchange rates of the imino protons of the C3:G10, G4:X9, A5:T8, and A6:T7base pairs. The greatest effects were observed at the neighbor A5:T8base pair. For the DDDhmand DDDfduplexes, the exchange rate of the A5:T8base pair imino proton increased at all concentrations of ammonia (Figure2). There was a 3-fold increased rate of base pair opening in the DDDhmduplex and a 5-fold increased rate of base pair opening in the DDDfduplex, with respect to the DDD duplex (Table2). In contrast, for the DDDcaduplex, the exchange rate of the A5:T8imino proton was similar to those of the DDD and DDDmduplexes at all concentrations of ammonia. These differences were reflected in measurements of the respective equilibrium constants for base pair opening. For the DDDhmduplex, the equilibrium constant for base pair opening (alphaKop) at base pair A5:T8was 7.3 * 108, and for the DDDfduplex, the equilibrium constant for base pair opening at A5:T8was 1.1 * 109, differing from the DDD and DDDmduplexes (3.4 * 108and 3.5 * 108, respectively). In contrast, for the DDDcaduplex, the equilibrium constant for base pair opening of A5:T8was 4.1 * 108, similar to that of the DDD and DDDmduplexes. The neighbor effect did not extend beyond the A5:T8base pair. At base pair A6:T7, exchange rates as a function of ammonia concentration were comparable for all duplexes. Plots showing imino proton exchange rates obtained by monitoring magnetization from water as a function of ammonia base catalyst: (A) base pair C3:G10, (B) base pair G4:X9, (C) base pair A5:T8, and (D) base pair A6:T7in the DDD (black), DDDm(green), DDDhm(blue), DDDf(red), and DDDca(pink) duplexes. The observed exchange rate without an ammonia catalyst. A smaller effect on base pair opening dynamics was observed at the G4:X9base pair. For the DDDfduplex, the exchange rate of G4:X9was greater at all concentrations of ammonia than that for the DDDhm, DDDca, DDDm, and DDD duplexes (kop= 26 s-1in DDDfvskop= 16, 4, 7, and 8 s-1for DDDhm, DDDca, DDDm, and DDD, respectively). For the DDDfduplex, the equilibrium constant for base pair opening increased 3-fold, calculated as 2.8 * 107vs 1.2 * 107, 7.5 * 106, 1.2 * 107, and 6.0 * 106, respectively, for the DDD, DDDm, DDDhm, and DDDcaduplexes. In contrast, base pair opening dynamics at the neighboring C3:G10base pair were not affected by the presence of the oxidized cytosines in the DDDhm, DDDf, or DDDcaduplex. Thus, the differences in base pair opening dynamics for the 5hmC, 5fC, and 5caC bases in the 5'-T8X9G10-3' sequence of the DDD exhibit a pronounced sequence dependence, with the greatest effects being evident at the neighboring A5:T8base pair. This is the base pair located in the 5'-direction with respect to the oxidized cytosine X9. The overall results are summarized in Table2. The modified DDDhm, DDDf, and DDDcaduplexes yielded diffraction-quality crystals. Crystals belonged to the orthorhombicP212121space group. The crystal structures were determined using the unmodified DDD (PDB ID code 436D)Noneas a search model for molecular replacement. Structures were refined using anisotropic B factors to a resolution of 1.02 A for DDDhmand isotropic B factors to resolutions of 1.90 and 1.95 A for DDDfand DDDca, respectively. Each of the structures was compared to that of the DDD. NoneOverall, the structures were similar to the DDD,Noneas indicated by comparative rmsd analyses, with rmsd values of 0.67, 0.46, and 0.49 A for DDDhm, DDDf, and DDDca, respectively. Classical features of the DDD, including waters forming the minor groove spine of hydration,Nonewere conserved. The data and refinement statistics are provided in Table1. Figure3shows electron density and base pairing arrangements for the 5hmC:G, 5fC:G, and 5caC:G base pairs in the DDDhm, DDDf, and DDDcaduplexes, respectively. Watson-Crick base pairing was evident, and the hydroxymethyl, formyl, or carboxyl moieties of the oxidized cytosines were oriented into the major groove. The formyl group of 5fC and the carboxyl group of 5caC were within hydrogen-bonding range of theN4exocyclic amines of the oxidized cytosines. For the DDDhmduplex, electron density associated with the hydroxymethyl moiety of 5hmC suggested partial occupancy of two conformations. The major conformation refined with occupancy 0.8, and the minor conformation refined with occupancy 0.2. In the major conformation, the hydroxyl group hydrogen bonded with the terminal N1 ammonium moiety of a spermine and with G10O6via an ordered water molecule (Figure S2 of theSupporting Information). In the minor conformation, the hydroxyl group was oriented toward the backbone phosphate and formed interactions with neighboring waters (Figure S3 of theSupporting Information). A hydrogen bond was also observed between the hydroxyl group at the modified cytosine X21and an axially coordinated water (HOH 12) at a distance of 2.7 A, with a further interaction to G22N7 (2.8 A). An additional hydrogen bond was observed between the X21hydroxyl and G22O6via water HOH 11 (3.0 A distance from X21to HOH 11 and 2.7 A from HOH 11 to G22O6) (Figures S2 and S3 of theSupporting Information). Base stacking patterns for the DDDhm, DDDf, and DDDcaduplexes were similar (Figure4). Fourier (2Fo-Fc) sum electron density contoured at the 1.0sigma level (green meshwork) around the (A) 5hmC:G, (B) 5fC:G, and (C) 5caC:G base pairs showing Watson-Crick base pairing geometry. (A) DDDhm, (B) DDDf, and (C) DDDcastructures, illustrating stacking interactions at oxidation sites. The DDDhm, DDDf, and DDDcaduplexes were also examined by NMR,None,None,Noneusing standard methods. None,NoneThe sequential base aromatic - greater than deoxyribose anomeric NOEs were identified from C1- greater than G12(Figure S4 of theSupporting Information). For the DDDhm, DDDf, and DDDcaduplexes (and as well for the DDD and DDDmduplexes), the intensities of NOE cross-peaks between the purine H8 and pyrimidine H6 protons and the deoxyribose H1' protons were of the same relative magnitudes as those between other bases in the sequence, indicating that the glycosyl bonds maintained the anti conformations. In all instances, the NOE connectivity of the purine N1H and pyrimidine N3H protonsNonewas obtained from G2:C11- greater than C3:G10- greater than G4:X9- greater than A5:T8- greater than A6:T7(Figure5). NOE cross-peaks from the oxidized base X9N4H1 andN4H2 protons to the complementary base G4N1H proton were observed, as well as interactions to neighbor bases T8N3H and G10N1H, consistent with Watson-Crick geometry being favored, corroborating the crystallographic data (Figure3). Significantly, evidence for intranucleotide hydrogen bonding involving the formyl group of 5fC or the carboxyl group of 5caC and theN4exocyclic amine of 5fC or 5caC was evident in NMR spectra of the DDDfand DDDcaduplexes, for which both of the X9N4amino proton resonances shift downfield into the 7.8-8.8 ppm spectral range (Figure5). The effect was most pronounced for the DDDcaduplex. In contrast, for the DDD, DDDm, and DDDhmduplexes, one of theN4amino protons shifts downfield, consistent with the maintenance of a Watson-Crick base pair, whereas the other remains in the 6.5-7.0 ppm spectral range, which is the anticipated result given that cytosine, 5mC, and 5hmC cannot form this hydrogen bond. Overall, the NMR data corroborated the crystallographic data, giving no indication of the presence of imino tautomers and suggesting that each of the oxidized cytosines participated in normal Watson-Crick base pairing when placed opposite guanine. NOESY spectra depicting resonances for the thymine and guanine imino protons and sequential NOE connectivity for the imino protons of the base pairs G2:C11to A6:T7for (A) DDD, (B) DDDm, (C) DDDhm, (D) DDDf, and (E) DDDcaduplexes (lower panels). Expansion of the NOESY spectra for (A) DDD, (B) DDDm, (C) DDDhm, (D) DDDf, and (E) DDDcaduplexes (upper panels), illustrating the conservation of Watson-Crick base pairing and base stacking at the modification sites: a, C9or X9N4H1 - greater than T8N3H; b, C9or X9N4H2 - greater than T8N3H; c, C9or X9N4H1 - greater than G10N1H; d, C9or X9N4H2 - greater than G10N1H; e, C9or X9N4H1 - greater than G4N1H; f, A5H2 - greater than G4N1H; and g, C9or X9N4H2 - greater than G4N1H. (Indices m, hm, f, or ca refer to the base pairs in the modified duplexes, DDDm, DDDhm, DDDf, and DDDca, respectively.) Data were collected at 900 MHz. The 5hmC,None,None,None5fC,Noneand 5caCNone,None,Noneoxidation products of 5mC are intermediates in active demethylationNone-Noneand have potential roles in epigenetic regulation of cellular function. None,NoneTheir removal is orchestrated by glycosylase-mediated base excision repair; TDG is essential for active DNA demethylation. NoneIt has been reported that 5fC and 5caC, but not 5hmC, are substrates for thymine DNA glycosylase (TDG). NoneAccordingly, it was of interest to determine whether these oxidized cytosines differentially alter duplex DNA and how such differences correlate with differences in excision of 5hmC, 5fC, and 5caC by TDG. NoneThe Dickerson-Drew dodecamer (DDD)None,Noneprovided a platform for conducting these studies. It contains the 5'-CG-3' sequence associated with genomic cytosine methylation, and, most importantly, it is simultaneously amenable to crystallographicNone-Noneand spectroscopicNone-Noneanalyses. The presence of 5caC in the 5'-T8X9G10-3' sequence stabilizes the DDD, as evidenced by the 6-8 degrees C increase inTmfor the DDDcaas compared to theTmvalues of the DDD and of the DDDmunder the same conditions. NMR data for the base paired guanine N1H and thymine N3H imino protons (Figure1) confirm this conclusion. For the DDDcaduplex, at temperatures as high as 55 degrees C, the imino proton resonances of base pairs C3:G10, G4:X9, and A5:T8remain detectable (Figure1E). In contrast, for the DDDhmduplex and DDDfduplexes, the imino proton resonances of base pairs C3:G10, G4:X9, and A5:T8broaden at temperatures above 35 degrees (Figure1C,D). While the inclusion of 5caC into the 5'-T8X9G10-3' sequence in the DDD provides only a single data point for thermodynamic comparison, the observation that 5caC stabilizes the DDDcais consistent with calculations performed by Sumino et al. NoneIt also corroborates data obtained by the same group for the stabilities of 13-mers and 14-mers containing 5caC. This stabilization of the DDDcais not attributable to improved base stacking geometry of 5caC in DDDcabecause 5caC exhibits a base stacking geometry in the DDD that is similar to both 5hmC and 5fC (Figure4). However, electronic dipole-dipole interactions associated with 5caCNone,Nonemight enhance the thermodynamic stability of the DDDcaduplex without disturbing the stacking geometry. The imino proton exchange rates at base pairs C3:G10, G4:X9, and A5:T8depend upon the identity of the cytosine oxidation product and exhibit sequence dependence. The greatest effects are observed for the neighbor base pair A5:T8, with a smaller effect at G4:X9and minimal effect at the neighbor base pair C3:G10. Base pair A5:T8is the 5'-neighbor with respect to the oxidized cytosine at position X9, whereas base pair C3:G10is the 3'-neighbor with respect to the oxidized cytosine at position X9(Chart1). While the A5:T8base pair of the DDD intrinsically exhibits enhanced exchange kinetics,Nonethe presence of either 5fC or 5hmC further enhances imino proton exchange rates at A5:T8, whereas the presence of 5caC does not (Figure2), an observation that is consistent with the thermal stabilization of the duplex by 5caC as opposed to 5fC or 5hmC. Thus, for DDDf, base pair A5:T8base pair opens with the frequency ofkop= 222 s-1, five times faster than in the DDD. For the DDDhmduplex, base pair A5:T8opens three times faster than in the DDD (kop= 110 s-1vskop= 40 s-1in DDDhmand DDD, respectively). Evidence for wobble base pairing geometry at oxidized cytosines,None,None,None,None,Nonearising from imino tautomers of 5caC or 5fC,None,Noneis not observed. The results are consistent with calculations of the stabilities of the amino and imino tautomers of 5fC and 5caC at the nucleobase level, which have suggested that, when paired with G, both 5fC and 5caC preferentially form Watson-Crick pairs. NoneInstead, each of the 5hmC, 5fC, and 5caC oxidation products favors Watson-Crick hydrogen-bonding interactions when located in the 5'-T8X9G10-3' sequence (Figures3-5). A common structural feature of 5fC and 5caC in the DDD is formation of intranucleobase hydrogen bonds between the carbonyl oxygens of the formyl or carboxyl groups, respectively, and a cytosineN4H amino proton. This hydrogen bond had been observed between the exocyclicN4amino group and the formyl oxygen at C5 of 5fC at the nucleoside level. None,NoneThe downfield shifts of both of the X9N4amino proton resonances into the 7.8-8.8 ppm spectral range is evident in NMR spectra of the DDDfand DDDcaduplexes (Figure5) and is consistent with the formation of these hydrogen bonds. The NMR data corroborates the crystallographic structure data (Figure3), which shows that the carbonyl oxygens of the formyl or carboxyl groups of 5fC or 5caC, respectively, and a cytosineN4H amino proton are within hydrogen-bonding distance. The effect in the NMR data is most pronounced for the DDDcaduplex (Figure5). In the crystallographic structure of the DDDcaduplex (Figure3), this hydrogen bond keeps the carboxyl group in plane with the oxidized cytosine. For the DDD, DDDm, and DDDhmduplexes, one of theN4amino protons shifts downfield, consistent with the maintenance of a Watson-Crick base pair, whereas the other remains in the 6.5-7.0 ppm spectral range, which is the anticipated result given that cytosine, 5mC, and 5hmC cannot form this hydrogen bond. DNA glycosylasesNonetypically employ an extrahelical base-flipping mechanismNone,None-Noneto position substrates for catalysis. Differences in the ability of TDG to excise 5fC, 5caC, or 5hmC from DNANonecould be mediated by differential recognition of these oxidized cytosine bases in DNA. Stivers et al. None,None-Nonedemonstrated that damage recognition by a different glycosylase, uracil DNA glycosylase (UDG), is facilitated by enhanced base pair opening rates for destabilized A:U base pairs. NoneThe present data reveal that site- and sequence-specific differences with regard to duplex stability and base pair opening dynamics are observed when the 5hmC, 5fC, and 5caC are placed into the DDDhm, DDDf, and DDDcadodecamers within the 5'-T8X9G10-3' sequence. Neither the stabilization of the DDD by 5caC nor the differences in base pair opening dynamics correlate with differences in the excision of 5hmC, 5fC, and 5caC by TDG, as reported by Maiti et al. NoneBoth 5hmC and 5fC exhibit increased base pair opening rates at the neighboring A5:T8base pair. However, only 5fC is excised by TDG. Moreover, 5caC, which also is excised by TDG, thermally stabilizes the DDDcaand does not exhibit increased base pair opening kinetics at the 5'-neighbor A5:T8base pair (Figure2). It has been proposed that the imino tautomers of 5caC or 5fC adopt wobble-like base pairing geometry with the complementary G, which might provide a basis for recognition by TDG. None,NoneThe present crystallographic and NMR data indicate that the 5hmC, 5fC, and 5caC bases each favor Watson-Crick base pairing in the DDD duplex. This argues against wobble base pairing involving imino tautomers of these oxidized cytosines as a primary mode of recognition by TDG. However, the presence of small amounts of the imino tautomers cannot be ruled out, nor can a shift from Watson-Crick base pairing to wobble pairing subsequent to enzyme binding. It has been proposed that the hydrogen bond between the exocyclicN4amine and the formyl or carboxyl oxygen at C5 of the 5fC or the 5caC base might shift the equilibrium toward the imino tautomerNone,Noneand lead to protonation at N3 of the oxidized cytosine. None,NoneAdditionally, other factors such as electrostatic and steric contributions, which remain to be examined, might modulate the differential recognition of these oxidized cytosines by TDG. Alternatively, differences in the ability of TDG to excise 5fC, 5caC, or 5hmC from DNA could be controlled by differences in the catalytic step of base excision, once the oxidized cytosine bases have been inserted into the active site of the glycosylase. Maiti et al. Noneimplied a role of the conserved Asn140in the chemical step and of the conserved Arg275in nucleotide flipping into the active site. In additional studies, Maiti et al. Noneaccounted for the differential excision ability of TDG with respect to 5hmC, 5fC, and 5caC by arguing that activity is greatest for oxidized cytosines possessing electron-withdrawing substituents at the C5 carbon, which stabilize developing negative charge in the transition state complex for base excision. Following their argument, 5fC is a good substrate and 5hmC is not. NoneAt neutral pH, 5caC exists as an anion with pKavalues of 2.4 for the carboxyl and 4.3 for the N3 position,Noneand catalysis is facilitated because the ionized carboxyl group lowers the pKaof cytosine and stabilization of the carboxyl by the exocyclic amine of cytosine creates an electron-withdrawing effect. None,NoneMaiti et al. Nonedemonstrated that the excision ability of TDG with respect to 5fC is pH-independent but that the excision of 5caC is acid-catalyzed. Moreover, Zhang et al. Nonefound that TDG binds to 5caC with greater affinity than to 5fC, U, or T and proposed that residues Asn157, His151, and Tyr152are involved in hydrogen bonds with the 5caC carboxyl group. Finally, the structure of TDG in complex with DNA containing a G:5hmU mismatch showed that TDG engages in hydrogen-bonding interactions with both 5hmU and 5caC. NoneThe present results are consistent with the proposal by Maiti et al.,Nonein which the excision specificity of TDG for 5fC and 5caC vs 5hmC is dictated by differences in the enzyme-substrate complex transition state. Both 5fC and 5caC form hydrogen bonds between the carbonyl oxygens of their formyl or carboxyl groups, respectively, and a cytosine exocyclicN4H amino proton. The electron-withdrawing effect of the 5fC and 5caC substitutentsNone,Noneshould be enhanced by hydrogen bonding between the carbonyl oxygens of their formyl or carboxyl groups, respectively, and a cytosine exocyclicN4H amino proton. This would be anticipated to stabilize developing negative charge in the transition state complex for base excision. The cytosine oxidation products 5hmC, 5fC, and 5caC exhibit differences in thermodynamics and base pair opening dynamics when placed into the 5'-T8X9G10-3' sequence of the DDD, but these do not correlate with differences in the ability of TDG to excise these cytosine oxidation products. NoneWhile TDG may exploit thermodynamic and base pair opening dynamics in the recognition of oxidized cytosines in DNA, differences in the transition state complexes for the base excision step may be rate-limiting with respect to the chemical step of base excision. Of course, the 5'-T8X9G10-3' sequence is just one sequence, and it will be of interest to further examine the sequence dependence of these effects, particularly in light of the recent report from Raiber et al. Noneshowing that the presence of three 5fC sites in an iterated CG repeat sequence changes the geometry of the DNA grooves and base pairs containing the 5fC oxidation product. DNA glycosylases may exploit different mechanistic pathways toward base excision. The recognition of uracil by uracil DNA glycosylase (UDG) is reported to be facilitated by enhanced base pair opening rates at A:U base pairs. NoneInterestingly, the 5mC DNA glycosylase DEMETER (DME) removes 5mC, 5hmC, and 5caC but has no activity for 5fC. None,NoneIts inactivity toward 5fC also does not seem to be correlated with 5fC base pair opening rates, and it does not seem to correlate with the electron-withdrawing effect of the 5fC and 5caC substitutents. None,None