The currently incomplete maps of molecular interactions between cellular components limit our understanding of the molecular mechanisms behind human diseaseNone-None. Ultimately, high-throughput mapping projectsNone-Noneare expected to provide the accurate maps of interactomes necessary to systematically unlock disease mechanisms. Yet, as a complete interaction map is at least a decade away, we need to develop tools that allow us to infer the structure of cellular networks from empirically obtained biological dataNone,None. Many current tools designed to infer functional and physical interactions in the cell rely on the global response matrix,NoneNonewhich captures the change in nodei's activity in response to changes in nodej'sNone. This matrix can be measured directly from gene knockout or overexpression experiments, or inferred indirectly using related measures such as Pearson or Spearman correlationsNone, mutual informationNone,Noneor Granger causalityNone. Traditional methods for predicting linksNone,None,None,Noneassume that the magnitude ofGNonecorrelates with the likelihood of a direct functional or physical link between nodesiandj. YetGNonecannot distinguish between direct and indirect relationships: a pathi- greater than k- greater than jcan result in a significant response measured betweeniandj, falsely suggesting the existence of a direct link between them (None). Several methods correcting for such effects have been proposed: information theoretic approaches evaluate the association between nodes by measuring the entropy of their mutual activities, where a low entropy indicates a statistical dependence between the node activitiesNone,None,None; probabilistic models, such as the graphical Gaussian model, allow one to evaluate the correlation betweeniandj, while controlling for the state of nodek, and thereby provide a more indicative measure of direct linkageNone-None; other models rely on assumptions pertaining to the network topology, such as the tendency of real networks to exhibit strong degree correlationsNone. The ultimate solution, however, should enable us to fully unwind the direct from the indirect effects, providing a measure which distinctly indicates the existence of direct links. Consequently, here we focus on the local response matrixNoneNonein which the contribution of indirect effects is eliminated. In contrast with(1), which allows for global changes iniandj's environment, here the "?" indicates thatSNoneis defined to capture only local effects, namely the response ofito changes injwhen all surrounding nodes exceptiandjremain unchanged. HenceSNone greater than 0 implies a direct link betweeniandj. Here we derive a method for calculating the local response matrix(2)from experimentally accessible correlation measures, allowing us to mathematically discriminate direct from indirect links. We show that the resultingSNonematrix, in which the contribution of indirect paths is silenced, is more discriminative than the empirically obtainedGNonematrix, enhancing our ability to extract direct links from experimentally collected correlation data. To extractSNonefrom the experimentally accessibleGNone, we formally link(1)and(2)viaNoneNoneEquation (3)is exact and the sum accounts for all network paths connectingiandj(None). It is of limited use, however, as it requires us to solveN2coupled algebraic equations. InNonewe show that(3)can be reformulated asNoneNonewhereIis the identity matrix andNonesets the off-diagonal terms ofMto zero. To obtain an approximate solution forSwe use that fact that typically, perturbations decay rapidly as they propagate through the network, so that the response observed between two nodes is dominated by the shortest path between them. This allows us to approximateNonewithNone(None), obtainingNoneNoneEquation (5), our main result, providesSNonefrom the experimentally accessibleGNone. It achieves this through a 'silencing effect', in which direct response terms are preserved, while indirect responses are silenced. To understand this consider a specific term inGNone, documenting the response of nodeitoj's perturbation. As indicated byEq. (3), this response is a consequence of all direct and indirect paths leading fromjtoi. As we document below, the transformation(5)detects the indirect paths and silences them, maintaining only the contribution of the direct paths (None). To demonstrate the predictive power of(5), we implemented Michaelis-Menten dynamics on a model network (None), as commonly used to model generegulationNone,None. We obtainedGNoneby perturbing the activity of each node and then calculatedSNoneusing(5). Figure 2ashows theGNoneandSNoneterms associated with interacting (green) and non-interacting (orange) node pairs. AlthoughGNoneis higher for direct interactions, the overlap between the orange and the green symbols indicates a lack of a clear thresholdqthat separates direct and indirect interactions. In contrast,SNonedisplays a clear separation between direct and indirect interactions, accurately predicting each direct link. Indeed, the ROC curve derived fromGNone(None, red) has an area of AUROC = 0.91, reflecting inherent limitations in separating direct from indirect interactions based onGNoneonly. In contrast forSNonewe obtain AUROC = 0.997 (blue), where the true positive rate (TPR) reaches 100% with a false positive rate (FPR) of less than 10-3. Also, although forGNoneprecision increases gradually with the thresholdq(None), forSNoneprecision jumps to one forq greater than 10-4. Hence, in our well controlled model system effectively any non-zeroSNonecorresponds to a direct link. The performance of(5)is due to the silencing effect: it leavesGNoneunchanged ifiandjare linked, while it systematically lowers allGNonenot rooted in a direct interaction. To quantify this effect we measured the discrimination ratioDeltaNone= less than GNone greater than Dir/ less than GNone greater than Indir(DeltaNone= less than SNone greater than Dir/ less than SNone greater than Indir) which captures the ratio betweenGNone(SNone) terms associated with direct links and those associated with indirect links (None). We find thatSNoneis much more discriminative thanGNoneowing to its silencing of indirect responses. To quantify this effect we measure the silencingNoneNonewhich captures the increased power ofSNoneto discriminate between direct and indirect links compared toGNone. In our model system we find thatkappa= 15, a silencing of more than an order of magnitude (None). Furthermore, the longer is the distancedNonebetween two nodes, the larger is the silencing (None). As an illustration, consider a linear cascade in which changes in any node result in a finite responseGNoneby all other nodes (None). Equation (5)silences all indirect responses, while leaving the response of direct links effectively unchanged, offering a discriminative measure that enables a perfect reconstruction of the original network. To test the predictive power of(5)on real data we used theE. colidatasets distributed by the DREAM5 network inference challengeNone. The input data include a compendium of microarray experiments measuring the expression levels of 4,511E. coligenes (141 of which are known transcription factors) under 805 different experimental conditions (None). We constructed three separate global response matricesGNonebetween the 141 transcription factors and their 4,511 potential target genes, based on (i) Pearson correlations; (ii) Spearman rank correlations; and (iii) mutual information, which are three commonly used methods for link detection (None). From each of the threeGNonematrices we obtainedSNonevia(5), and compared the performance ofGNonewith the pertinentSNone. To validate our predictions we relied on the gold standard used in the DREAM5 challenge, consisting of 2,066 established gene regulatory interactions. Measuring AUROC fromGNoneandSNone, we find an improvement of 56% for Pearson correlations (None), 67% for Spearman rank correlations (None) and a smaller improvement of 6% for mutual information (None),e.g. allowing us to improve upon the top performing inference methodsNone. We further tested the discrimination ratio, Delta, and the silencing,kappa, for each of these methods, finding that indirect correlations are subject to an average of two-fold silencing in the transition fromGNonetoSNone(None). Silencing is especially crucial in the presence of the cascade and co-regulation motifs shown inFigures 3e-f, where most inference methods indicate a spurious link betweenXandYowing to the indirect correlation mediated by nodeI. Indeed, the transformation(5)silences these indirect correlations by a factor of three or more for Pearson and Spearman correlations and by a smaller factor for mutual information, overcoming one of the most common hurdles of inference methods, which tend to over-represent triadic motifsNone. As all experimental data is subject to noise, the global response matrix,GNone, is characterized by some degree of uncertainty. To test the performance of our methodology in the presence of noise, we repeated the numerical experiment ofFigure 2, this time adding Gaussian noise toGNone, which allows us to calculate silencing as a function of increasing the signal to noise ratiotheta(None). As expected, silencing is unaffected by small values oftheta, so thatkappafeatures a plateau belowtheta? 0.1. For largetheta, silencing decays askappa~theta-1, demonstrating that the performance of the method decreases slowly with increasing the signal to noise ratio. Indeed, as opposed to a rapid exponential decay, the observed slower power-law dependence indicates that the method is rather tolerant against noise. Silencing is lost only when the noise reaches the critical levelthetaC? 0.75, when the signal is almost completely overridden by noise, leading tokappa= 1 (None). Hidden nodes offer another source of uncertainty. They represent the fact that in most cases we are unable to read the states ofallnodes in the systemNone. To illustrate the effect of the hidden nodes on the performance of the silencing method, we consider the case of a simple cascade less than italic greater than i - greater than k - greater than j less than /italic greater than , where the intermediate nodekis hidden. In this scenario,Eq. (5)will not be able to silence the indirect less than italic greater than i - greater than j less than /italic greater than link because in the observable system theGNoneterm cannot be attributed to any indirect path. Hence, absent any other information about the system, it is mathematically impossible to infer the indirectness ofGNone, as the removal ofkisolatedifromjNone. This touches upon the fundamental mechanism of silencing: as illustrated inFigure 1(andNone) the silencing transformation(5)exploits the flow of information through indirect paths. Consequently, if as a result of hidden nodes the network fragments into several components such that the node pairiandjbecome isolated from each other, then all indirect paths between them becamehiddenand the pertinentGNoneterm will not be silenced (None). Hence silencing is expected to fail only when the network breaks into many isolated components so that most node pairs become isolated. Fortunately, a fundamental property of complex networks is that with average degree less than k greater than greater than greater than 1, one needs to remove a large fraction of the nodes to fragment the underlying giant connected componentNone-None. Therefore we can build on percolation theory, which allows us to analytically predict how the size of the largest connected component changes with the random removal of a certain fraction of nodesNone,None. The calculation shows that silencing is maintained as long as the fraction of hidden nodes is smaller thanNoneNonewhereNone(None). This equation indicates that for large less than k greater than the method will be reliable even if a large fraction of the nodes are hidden. To test this prediction, we revisited the numerically obtainedGNoneanalyzed inFigure 2and measured the degree of silencing after randomly removing an increasing fraction of nodes. In each case we also measured the ratio between isolated and connected node pairs (rho). We find that, as predicted, the degree of silencing is driven mainly byrho, approachingkappa? 1 (no silencing) whenrho greater than = 1, namely when the isolated pairs begin to dominate the network (None). Here as less than k greater than = 4,Eq. (7)predictsetaC? 0.57,i.e. the method will fail only when almost 60% of the nodes are hidden. Note that for biological networks less than k greater than is expected to be in the range ofNone less than k greater than ? 10, predictingetaC? 0.8. Namely, one needs to lose access to 80% of the nodes for silencing to lose its effectiveness. With computational complexityNone,Eq. (5)is scalable and requires no assumptions about the network topology. By silencing indirect effects, it turns the raw correlation data into a predictiveSNonematrix, dominated by direct interactions. It is especially suited to treat perturbation data, such as genetic perturbation experiments, in which caseGNonedescribes the response of all genes (dxNone) as a consequence of the perturbation of the source gene (dxNone)None. In practice, however,GNonecould be the result of a broader set of experimental realizations where other measures are used to evaluate the association between nodes, typically statistical measures such as Pearson or Spearman correlation coefficients. Still, our empirical results (None) clearly show that the transformation(5)successfully applies to these empirically accessible measures as well. Hence silencing is largely insensitive to the specific process by whichGNonewas constructed. The method's broad applicability is rooted in the fact that it does not depend on the value of each specific term inGNone, but rather on the global relationships between them. Indeed, the global structure ofGNonereflects the patterns of propagation of the perturbations along the network. Equation (5)helps uncover these paths from the raw data, disentangling the direct from the indirect effects. These patterns of information flow are inherent to the underlying network structure, and should not depend on the specific experimental realization of(1). For instance, a cascadei- greater than j- greater than kwill be characterized by a decreasing correlation propagating along the arrows, a large correlation betweeniandjand a weaker one betweeniandk. Although the magnitude of these correlations might depend on the size or the form ofi's perturbation as well as on the statistical measure we used to evaluate them, the decay pattern required to infer the structure of the cascade is an inherent property of the network flow and can be successfully detected by the silencing method (None). The silencing transformation is derived from fundamental mathematical principles of dynamical correlations in networks. Hence it is expected to apply under rather general conditions. However, asEquation (5)indicates it requires that the input matrix,GNone, is invertible. This imposes some limitations when constructed from statistical correlation measures. For instance in the empirical results ofFigure 3awe constructedGNonefrom Pearson correlations, using the states of 4,511 nodes measured under 805 experimental conditions. In general, if the number of experimental conditions is smaller than the number of nodes the resulting Pearson correlation matrix may be singular. In this case additional processing will be required before(5)could be applied. Here, following the DREAM5 protocol, we only focused on the correlations between the 141 known transcription factors and the rest of the nodes, which lead to an invertibleGNone(None). Other means to ensureGNone's invertibility are discussed inNone. Isolating indirect effects in correlation data, a fundamental challenge of network inference, is typically approached through local probabilistic toolsNone,None-None. In contrast, the success of the silencing method is rooted in its exploitation the global network topologyNone: it relies on the fundamental principles of network structure and dynamics to identify and silence the effects of indirect paths. The ability to extractSNonefromGNonecould also have implications for our understanding of network dynamics. Indeed,GNoneis a global network measure, as its magnitude is determined by the numerous indirect paths connectingiandj. Hence, for a given dynamics, theGNonematrix will take a different form depending on the network topology, making it a poor predictor of the system's dynamics. By eliminating indirect effects,SNonemeasures the effect geneiwould have on genejhad they been isolated from the rest of the network. It thus helps us quantify the dynamical mechanism that governs individual pairwise interactions, avoiding the convolution of dynamical and topological effects present in experimental data. For instance, consider a set of perturbation experiments providingGNone. The structure ofGNonereflects the microscopic mechanisms that govern the pairwise interactions,e.g. genetic regulation and biochemical processes. It is difficult, however to extract this information fromGNonesince its terms are a convolution of many interactions, reflecting the many paths leading fromitoj. The transition toSNone, via(5), allows us to treat each isolated interaction on its own, providing a direct observation into the microscopic interaction mechanism. Direct application of this fact could be the derivation of a rate equation that governs the system's dynamics fromGNone, as well as predicting the universality class and the scaling laws governing the system's response to perturbations. Hence(5)helps translate the ever-growing amount of data on global correlations into valuable local information.