Estrogens, acting via estrogen receptor a (ERa), stimulate cell proliferation and tumor growth. None-NoneThe importance of estrogens and ERa in breast cancer is illustrated by the central role of endocrine therapy targeting estrogens and ERa in treatment of ERa+breast cancer. None-NoneTo help fold and sort the increased protein required for estrogen-ERa induced cell proliferation, cells must increase chaperone levels. The endoplasmic reticulum (EnR) stress sensor, the unfolded protein response (UPR) monitors and maintains protein-folding homeostasis. None,NoneThe UPR responds to misfolded proteins, or other forms of stress, by activating three signal transduction pathways, which reduce protein production and increase EnR protein-folding capacity. Protein production is regulated by autophosphorylation of the stress-activated transmembrane kinase, PERK. None,NoneP-PERK phosphorylates eukaryotic initiation factor 2a (eIF2a), resulting in transient inhibition of protein synthesis. The other UPR arms initiate with proteolytic activation of the transcription factor ATF6a, leading to increased chaperone production and activation of the EnR splicing factor IRE1a, which alternatively splices the transcription factor XBP1, leading to production of active spliced-XBP1, increased protein folding capacity and altered mRNA decay and translation. None,NoneThe UPR is usually inactive in normal cells, but is overexpressed in several cancers. NoneChronic UPR activation leads to increased expression of EnR chaperones, such as BiP (GRP78/HSAP5), p58IPKand calreticulin that facilitate protein folding and promote survival, proliferation, angiogenesis, and resistance to chemotherapy and endocrine therapy. None-NoneIn the widely studied "reactive mode", the UPR in tumor cells is activated in response to accumulation of stress from rapid cell division, hypoxia and therapy. A few studies in immune cells describe a different type of UPR activation; in this "anticipatory mode", the UPR is activated in the absence of EnR stress and prior to the accumulation of unfolded proteins. None,NoneWe explored whether estrogen induces anticipatory activation of the UPR in the absence of EnR stress, increasing protein folding capacity prior to the increased protein production and protein folding load that accompanies activation of the genomic estrogen-ERa cell proliferation program. Previous studies of the UPR and of estrogen-ERa action focused on the estrogen-inducible UPR gene, XBP1. XBP1 binds to and activates ERa; XBP1 expression is associated with tamoxifen resistance in ERa+breast cancer. None-NoneThe plasma membrane enzyme phospholipase C ? (PLC?) hydrolyzes PIP2to diacyglycerol (DAG) and inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate (IP3). We show that the mitogen estrogen, 17beta-estradiol (E2), acting through a rapid extranuclear action of ERa, elicits a PLC?-mediated opening of EnR IP3R calcium channels, increasing cytosol calcium and triggering anticipatory activation of each arm of the UPR. Opening the IP3R calcium channel and activating the ATF6a arm of the UPR, resulting in BiP induction, are important for subsequent E2-ERa induced cell proliferation. Consistent with an important role in cancer for anticipatory activation of the UPR, analysis of data from ~1,000 ERa+breast cancer patients demonstrates that elevated expression of a UPR gene signature is tightly correlated with subsequent resistance to tamoxifen therapy, time to tumor recurrence and poor survival. To evaluate the ability of E2-ERa to activate the UPR, we focused on production of spliced and modified proteins that result from activating the three arms of the UPR (Supplementary Figure 1). E2rapidly activated the IRE1a arm of the UPR, as shown by increases in spliced-XBP1 (sp-XBP1) mRNA in T47D and MCF-7 breast and PEO4 ovarian cancer cells (Figure 1a and b), and by induction of downstream sp-XBP1 targets, SERP1 and ERDJ (Supplementary Figure 2a). NoneThe antiestrogens ICI 182,780/Faslodex/fulvestrant (ICI) and 4-hydroxytamoxifen, (4-OHT), which compete with E2for binding to ERa, blocked the E2-mediated increase in sp-XBP1 (Figure 1a). Consistent with E2-ERa activating the IRE1a arm of the UPR, RNAi knockdown of ERa blocked E2-induction of sp-XBP1 mRNA (Figure 1c), and induction of GREB1 by nuclear E2-ERa (Supplementary Figure 2b). We next assessed whether estrogen activates the ATF6a arm of the UPR. ATF6a is a 90 kDa protein (p90-ATF6a) that translocates from the EnR to the Golgi in response to stress, where it undergoes proteolytic cleavage to its active 50 kDa form (p50-ATF6a) (Supplementary Figure 1b). None,None,NoneIncreased ATF6a proteolysis in T47D cells and PEO4 cells demonstrates that E2-ERa transiently activates the ATF6a arm of the UPR (Figure 1d;Supplementary Figure 2c). Since pretreatment with ICI, abolished the E2-mediated increase in p50-ATF6a, this effect is mediated through ERa (Figure 1d). Active cleaved ATF6a regulates induction of BiP and other EnR chaperones. None,NoneConsistent with this, ATF6a knockdown in T47D cells blocked BiP induction (Figure 1e). BiP increases EnR protein folding capacity, contributing to resolution of the stress, and helps reverse UPR activation; likely preventing the cytotoxicity that would result if UPR activation was sustained. Consistent with its antiapoptotic role, in several cancers, elevated levels of BiP are associated with a poor prognosis. NoneEstrogen rapidly induced BiP mRNA in breast and ovarian cancer cells (Figure 1f), leading to a 2.3-fold increase in BiP protein (Figure 1g). RNAi knockdown of ERa prevented E2-induction of BiP mRNA (Figure 1h). PERK activation leads to inhibition of protein synthesis (Supplementary Figure 1c). Surprisingly, E2induces a rapid and transient increase in PERK phosphorylation (Figure 2a), resulting in increased phosphorylation of eIF2a (Figure 2b) and a modest transient decline in overall protein synthesis (Figure 2c). Consistent with p-PERK catalyzing formation of p-eIF2a, PERK knockdown inhibited formation of p-eIF2a (Figure 2d). Consistent with E2acting through ERa, ICI inhibited E2-stimulated phosphorylation of PERK and eIF2a and largely reversed the E2-mediated inhibition of protein synthesis (Figure 2a, b, and c). PERK activation leads to ATF4 expression, and we observed a transient increase in ATF4 expression (Figure 2e). However, the proapoptotic protein CHOP was not induced because mild and transient activation of PERK does not induce CHOP (Figure 2f;Supplementary Figure 2d). NoneTogether, this data demonstrates that E2, acting through ERa, activates all three UPR arms. Rapid UPR activation by E2-ERa suggested accumulation of unfolded protein was not triggering UPR activation. Some UPR activators, such as thapsigargin, rapidly activate the UPR by depleting Ca2+stores in the lumen of the EnR, increasing intracellular Ca2+. To test whether E2rapidly alters cytosol Ca2+, we monitored cytosol calcium using the sensor dye Fluo-4 AM. In the presence or absence of extracellular Ca2+, estrogen produced a rapid and transient increase in fluorescence in T47D breast cancer cells (Figure 3a and b). Since E2increases cytosol Ca2+when there is no extracellular Ca2+, and the EnR lumen is the major Ca2+store available to increase cytosol Ca2+, E2is acting by depleting the EnR Ca2+store. Estrogen also increased cytosol calcium in PEO4 ovarian cancer cells (Supplementary Figure 3). Inhibition of the IP3R channel with 2-APB, which locks the IP3R Ca2+channels closed, and RNAi knockdown of the three isoforms of the IP3R channels (Figure 3c), abolished the rapid E2-ERa-mediated increase in cytosol Ca2+(Figure 3a, b, and d). In contrast, high concentration ryanodine (Ry), which closes the ryanodine receptor (RyR) Ca2+channels, did not block the increase in cytosol Ca2+(Figure 3a and b). We next assessed whether Ca2+release was necessary for UPR activation using 2-APB and ryanodine individually, or in combination. 2-APB, but not ryanodine, inhibited E2-ERa activation of the PERK arm of the UPR, as shown by inhibition of formation of p-eIF2a (Supplementary Figure 4a). RNAi knockdown of IP3R (Figure 3c) blocked E2-induced Ca2+release (Figure 3d), activation of the IRE1a arm of the UPR (Supplementary Figure 4b), and blocked E2-induction of BiP (Figure 3c), which is a commonly used surrogate readout for UPR activation. We next tested the possibility that activation of PLC?, which hydrolyzes PIP2to DAG and IP3, plays a role in E2-mediated opening of the IP3R Ca2+channels. Treating T47D cells with the PLC? inhibitor, U73122, or siRNA knockdown of PLC?, abolished the rapid E2-ERa-mediated increase in cytosol Ca2+(Figure 3e and f;Supplementary Figure 5). Since PLC? mediates E2-dependent opening of the IP3R Ca2+channels and calcium release (Figure 3f), we examined the effect of siRNA knockdown of PLC? on E2-ERa-dependent activation of the UPR. siRNA knockdown of PLC? blocked E2-ERa activation of the ATF6a arm of the UPR, as shown by a reduction in p50-ATF6a, and inhibition of BiP induction (Figure 3e). To evaluate the role of ERa in the E2-mediated increase in cytosol calcium, we performed siRNA knockdown. In T47D cells, RNAi knockdown of ERa, in the absence of extracellular Ca2+, prevented E2-stimulated calcium release (Figure 3g and h;Supplementary Movie 1 and 2). PLC? is on the inner leaflet of the plasma membrane and the E2-ERa-mediated increase in cytosol Ca2+occurs in less than 2 min. Thus, the E2-ERa-mediated increase in intracellular Ca2+that leads to UPR activation is a rapid, extranuclear action of ERa at the plasma membrane. We explored the role of Ca2+release from the EnR in promoting E2-ERa induced gene expression, UPR activation, and subsequent cell proliferation. Consistent with a possible role for intracellular Ca2+in E2-ERa action,Nonechelating intracellular Ca2+with BAPTA-AM blocked E2-stimulated cell proliferation (Supplementary Figure 6a). In T47D cells, PLC? or IP3R knockdown, or locking IP3R with 2-APB, strongly inhibited the increase in cytosol Ca2+(Figure 3a, b, d, and f), UPR activation (Figure 3c and e;Supplementary Figure 4), and E2-ERa-stimulated cell proliferation (Figure 4a and b). However, IP3R knockdown did not inhibit E2-dependent down-regulation of ERa or E2-induction of GREB1 or pS2 mRNA (Figure 4c;Supplementary Figure 6b). None,NoneSimilarly, 2-APB did not abolish E2-ERa induced expression of stably transfected ERE-luciferase in T47D cells, while 2-APB and Ry together, strongly inhibited reporter gene expression (Figure 4d). This suggests there are different intracellular Ca2+requirements for E2-ERa-mediated UPR activation and E2-ERa-mediated gene expression. Importantly, the IP3R knockdown data uncouples UPR activation from E2-ERa-mediated gene expression, and demonstrates that blocking UPR activation is sufficient to inhibit estrogen-stimulated cell proliferation. We next evaluated the role of E2-induction of EnR chaperones in E2-ERa-stimulated cell proliferation. Knockdown of PLC? or IP3R strongly inhibited E2-induction of BiP and E2-ERa-stimulated cell proliferation (Figures 3c,3e, and4a). Knockdown of the primary UPR regulator of EnR chaperones, ATF6a, also strongly inhibited E2-induction of BiP and E2-ERa-stimulated cell proliferation (Figure 1eand4a). Thus, UPR activation and subsequent induction of EnR chaperones plays an important role in E2-ERa-stimulated cell proliferation. We further evaluated the effects of PLC?, IP3R, ATF6a, XBP1, and PERK knockdown on E2-stimulated proliferation of MCF-7 cells (Supplementary Figure 7). Knockdown of the ATF6a and XBP1 arms of the UPR produced 40% declines in E2-stimulated in cell proliferation, while PERK knockdown produced a 20% decline (Figure 4e). IP3R knockdown produced a 50% decline in E2-ERa-stimulated MCF-7 cell proliferation (Figure 4e). This is consistent with the 40% decline in proliferation following 2-APB treatment (Supplementary Figure 6c), which did not fully abolish E2-induction of pS2 and GREB1 mRNA (Figure 4f;Supplementary Figure 6d). Targeting IP3R in MCF-7 cells produced less dramatic inhibition of E2-ERa-stimulated cell proliferation compared to T47D cells or BG-1 ovarian cancer cells (Figure 4a, b, and e;Supplementary Figure 6c and e). Knockdown of PLC? in MCF-7 cells nearly abolished E2-ERa-stimulated cell proliferation (Figure 4e). Together, this data demonstrates that weak anticipatory activation of the UPR, resulting in induction of chaperones, plays an important role in E2-ERa-stimulated cell proliferation. This novel E2-ERa pathway leading to cancer cell proliferation is shown (Figure 4g). We investigated whether E2-ERa facilitates UPR activation by inducing the sensors that trigger activation of the three UPR arms. E2rapidly induced mRNAs encoding sensors for all 3 UPR arms and the chaperones BiP and GRP94 (Figure 5a). These were early responses, usually visible within 2 hours. Although some responses declined at later times, estrogen produced sustained increases in resident chaperones and some UPR components, such as eIF2a (Figure 5a). To assessin vivorelevance, we used growing MCF-7 tumors receiving estrogen and regressing MCF-7 tumors receiving only cholesterol vehicle (Figure 5b) and compared expression of classical measures of E2-ERa activity to markers of UPR activation. NoneIn the +E2tumors, the markers for E2-ERa activity, pS2 and GREB1 mRNAs,None,Nonewere induced 12-fold and 17-fold and all three UPR arms were moderately activated (Figure 5c and d). Consistent with activation of the IRE1a arm of the UPR, sp-XBP1 increased 3-fold, while total XBP1 declined (Figure 5d). Consistent with E2-activation of the ATF6a arm of the UPR, +E2tumors displayed 2.0 and 1.8-fold increases in BiP and GRP94 mRNAs, respectively (Figure 5d). Levels of CHOP and GADD34 mRNA were 2.1-fold and 1.4-fold higher in the +E2group, respectively, indicating weak activation of the PERK arm (Figure 5d). While levels of primary UPR sensors IRE1a and PERK were reduced in these tamoxifen-sensitive tumors, their immediate targets eIF2a and sp-XBP1 were increased (Figure 5d). To assess UPR activity early in ERa+breast cancer development, we compared E2-ERa activity and UPR pathway activity in samples of histologically normal breast epithelium and invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC). Compared to normal epithelium from IDC patients, IDC samples displayed elevated levels of ERa mRNA and E2-ERa induced pS2 and GREB1 mRNAs, and reduced levels of E2-ERa downregulated IL1-R1 mRNA (Figure 5e). IDC samples displayed elevated SERP1 mRNA, a marker for IRE1a activation;NoneCHOP and GADD34, which are markers of PERK activation; and BiP and GRP94 chaperones, which are markers of ATF6a activation (Figure 5f). These data suggest UPR activation occurs very early in tumor development. Using data from an independent cohort of 278 ERa+breast cancers we explored whether expression of ERa mRNA and protein, or E2-ERa-regulated genes, correlates with expression of UPR genes. Expression of several UPR genes displayed highly significant correlation with expression of ERa and ERa-target genes (Supplementary Table 1). Weakly activating, non-toxic, concentrations of the UPR activator, tunicamcyin (TUN), elicit an adaptive stress response that increases EnR chaperones, and renders cells resistant to subsequent exposure to an otherwise lethal concentration of tunicamycin. None,NoneConsistent with weak E2activation of the UPR, E2induces a 2.3-fold increase in BiP protein compared to a 5.5-fold increase in BiP following maximal UPR activation by a lethal concentration of tunicamycin (Figure 1gandSupplementary Figure 8). We tested whether prior exposure of T47D cells to E2, or a low concentration of tunicamycin, altered the concentration of tunicamycin required to subsequently induce substantial cell death. Pre-treating cells with estrogen or TUN had nearly identical effects; each elicited an ~10 fold increase in the concentration of tunicamycin required to induce apoptosis (Figure 6a). Thus, the E2-induced weak anticipatory activation of the UPR both facilitates tumor cell proliferation and is a potential mechanism by which estrogen might protect ERa+breast tumors against subsequent apoptosis due to hypoxia, nutritional deprivation and therapy. To explore UPR activation as a potential prognostic marker in ERa+breast cancer, we developed a UPR gene signature consisting of genes encoding components of the UPR pathway and downstream targets of UPR activation (Supplementary Table 2). Using data from 261 ERa+breast cancer patients, each assigned to a high- or low-genomic UPR grade, we observed reduced time to relapse for patients overexpressing the UPR signature (hazard ratio (HR) = 5.5, 95% CI: 3.1-9.8) (Supplementary Figures 9a and b). To evaluate the UPR signature in patients undergoing tamoxifen therapy, samples collected from 474 ERa+breast cancer patients, prior to starting 5-years of tamoxifen therapy, were assigned to low, medium, or high UPR risk groups. Increased prior expression of the UPR gene signature was tightly correlated with subsequent reduced time to recurrence (Figure 6b and d;Supplementary Figure 9c). Hazard ratios increased from 2.2 to 3.7 for the medium and high-risk groups, respectively, suggesting that recurrence risk is sensitive to levels of the UPR gene signature (Figure 6b). The UPR index provides prognostic information beyond current clinical covariates. In a cohort of 236 ERa+breast cancer patients, UPR overexpression was strongly predictive of reduced survival (HR 2.69, 95% CI: 1.3-5.6), over and above clinical covariates alone (tumor grade, node involvement, tumor size and ERa status) (Figures 6c and d;Supplementary Figure 9d). Thus, the UPR index is a powerful prognostic gene signature in ERa+breast cancer with predictive power to stratify patients into high and low risk groups. In contrast to the well-studied "reactive mode" of UPR activation that occurs in response to endoplasmic reticulum stress, there are few studies of UPR activation that anticipates the future need for increased capacity to fold and sort proteins, and occurs in the absence of endoplasmic reticulum stress. NoneAnticipatory UPR activation is observed in B-cell differentiation where UPR activation in plasma cells precedes the massive production and secretion of immunoglobulins. None,NoneBecause the signals responsible for anticipatory activation of the UPR are largely unknown, it is poorly understood. In the absence of cell stress or misfolded proteins, the mitogen, estrogen, acting via ERa, triggers anticipatory activation of the UPR in breast and ovarian cancer cells. In less than 2 minutes, E2-ERa triggers PLC?-mediated opening of EnR IP3R calcium channels and release of Ca2+into the cytosol. This increase in cytosol Ca2+stimulates activation of all three arms of the UPR and is required for E2-ERa-stimulated cell proliferation. Anticipatory activation of the UPR by E2-ERa enhances EnR protein folding capacity, and thereby primes cells to meet the higher protein folding and sorting demands that characterize the later growth phases of the cell cycle. The major EnR chaperone BiP, plays a central role in EnR homeostasis, protein processing, and UPR signaling. Since BiP knockdown stimulates UPR activation and promotes EnR stress-induced apoptosis,None,Noneand cells undergoing E2-mediated apoptosis have lower levels of chaperones,Nonewe assessed the consequences of abrogating the expansion of EnR protein-folding capacity by blocking anticipatory activation of the UPR. PLC?, IP3R or ATF6a knockdown blocked E2-induction of BiP and inhibited E2-ERa stimulated proliferation of T47D cells. While IP3R knockdown nearly abolished E2-ERa-stimulated Ca2+release from the EnR, and this blocked UPR activation, it did not inhibit E2-ERa-mediated gene expression. Thus, inhibition of E2-ERa-stimulated UPR activation and chaperone induction is sufficient to inhibit E2-ERa-stimulated cell proliferation. Using 2-APB and ryanodine together, or chelating intracellular calcium with BAPTA, completely abrogated the increase in intracellular calcium, and blocked E2-ERa-regulated gene expression. Based on the inhibitor and knockdown data, we hypothesize that very small increases in intracellular calcium are sufficient to enable E2-ERa-regulated gene expression and that somewhat larger increases in intracellular calcium are likely required for E2-ERa activation of the UPR. E2-ERa induces a substantial increase in intracellular calcium, which may promote coordination between the nucleus and endoplasmic reticulum, and couple activation of the E2-ERa genomic program with UPR activation and expansion of the EnR protein-folding capacity. We further validated the importance of this novel extranuclear pathway of E2-ERa action using MCF-7 cells to assess how knockdown of each pathway component affects E2-ERa-stimulated cell proliferation. PERK knockdown produced a 20% decline in E2-ERa-stimulated cell proliferation. Although seemingly detrimental to promoting cell proliferation, PERK activation may be required to fully activate the ATF6a arm of the UPR. NoneKnockdown of XBP1 or ATF6a produced a 40% decline in E2-ERa-stimulated cell proliferation. IP3R knockdown produced an even larger reduction in E2-ERa stimulated cell proliferation, while PLC? knockdown had the largest effect. Thus, anticipatory activation of the UPR plays an important role in E2-ERa dependent proliferation of cancer cells. As expected,None,NoneIDC tumor samples exhibited increased ERa expression and activation compared to normal breast epithelial tissue. Consistent with a role for the UPR in this proliferative phase of early tumor development, increased UPR expression and activation was observed in IDC tumor samples. This suggests that increased UPR expression occurs early in tumor development, long before detection, diagnosis, and the initiation of treatment. Activation of the UPR by E2-ERa exerts a long-term impact on the pathology of ERa positive breast cancer. Weak activation of the UPR by estrogen, or by tunicamcyin, elicits an adaptive response that protects cells from subsequent exposure to higher levels of cell stress. We explored whether the effects of E2-ERa on the UPR correlated with clinical resistance to tamoxifen therapy. Increased UPR activation and elevated expression of UPR components were predictive of a poor response to tamoxifen-therapy, shorter time to recurrence, and decreased overall survival. If UPR expression promotes resistance to tamoxifen therapy, some UPR genes should exhibit differential regulation in our tamoxifen-sensitive MCF-7 tumors,Nonecompared to their expression in the tamoxifen-resistance gene signature. Supporting this view, several genes encoding UPR components were E2-downregulated in tamoxifen-sensitive MCF-7 tumors, but elevated in the human tumors expressing the tamoxifen-resistance gene signature (PERK, p58IPK). For ERa+breast cancers resistant to endocrine therapies, an important objective is development of more specific biomarkers that predict therapeutic response and identification of new therapeutic targets. The UPR is a new biomarker and therapeutic target in ERa+breast cancer; validated through mechanistic studies in culture, a mouse xenograft, and bioinformatics analysis of patient tumor samples. Anticipatory estrogen activation of the UPR is a novel extranuclear action of ERa, a previously undescribed early component of the estrogen-ERa cell proliferation program and a new paradigm by which estrogens may influence tumor development and resistance to therapy. Cell culture medium and conditions were previously described. None-NoneMCF-7, T47D, and T47D-kBluc cells were obtained from the ATCC. Drs. S. Kaufmann and K. Korach provided PEO4 cells and BG-1 cells, respectively. E2, 4-OHT, U73122, 2-APB, and tunicamycin were from Sigma Aldrich. ICI 182,780 was from Tocris Biosciences and ryanodine was from Santa Cruz Biotechnology. Phospho-eIF2a (#3398), eIF2a (#5324), Phospho-PERK (#3179), PERK (#5683), and BiP (#3177) antibodies were from Cell Signaling. Pan-IP3R (sc-28613), XBP1 (sc-7160), and ERa (sc-56836) antibodies were from Santa Cruz Biotechnology. Other antibodies used were ATF6a (Imgenex) and beta-Actin (Sigma). Cells proliferation assays were carried out as described. None-NoneProtein synthesis was evaluated by measuring incorporation of35S-Methionine into newly synthesized protein. Cells were incubated in 96 well plates for 20 minutes with 3 uCi of35S-methionine per well (PerkinElmer), lysed, and clarified by centrifugation. The appropriate volume, normalized to total protein, was spotted onto Whatman 540 filter paper discs and immersed in cold 10% TCA and washed in 5% TCA. Trapped protein was solubilized and filters counted. Cytoplasmic Ca2+concentrations were measured using the calcium-sensitive dye, Fluo-4 AM. None,NoneCells were grown on 35 mm-fluorodish plates (World Precision Instruments) for two days prior to experiments. Cells were loaded with 5 uM Fluo-4 AM (Life Technologies) in buffer (140 mM NaCl, 4.7 mM KCl, 1.13 mM MgCl2, 10 mM HEPES, 10 mM Glucose, pH = 7.4) for 30 minutes at 37 degrees C. The cells were washed three times with buffer and incubated with either 2 mM or 0 mM CaCl2for 10 minutes. Images were captured for one minute to determine basal fluorescence intensity, and then the appropriate treatment was added. Measurements used a Zeiss LSM 700 confocal microscope with a Plan-Four 20X objective (N.A. = 0.8) and 488-nM laser excitation (7% power). Images were obtained through monitoring fluorescence emission at 525 nM, and analyzed with AxioVision and Zen software (Zeiss). Reporter gene assays and qRT-PCR were previously described. None,NonesiRNA knockdowns were performed using DharmaFECT1 Transfection Reagent and 100 nM ON-TARGETplus non-targeting pool or SMARTpools for ERa (ESR1), PLC? (PLCG1), PERK (EIF2AK3), ATF6a (ATF6), XBP1, or pan-IP3R (Dharmacon). The pan-IP3R SmartPool consisted of three individual SmartPools, each at 33 nM, directed against each isoform of the IP3R (ITPR1, ITPR2, and ITPR3). Experiment were approved by the Institutional Animal Care Committee (IACUC) of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. The MCF-7 cell mouse xenograft model has been described previously. NoneEstrogen pellets (1 mg:19 mg estrogen:cholesterol) were implanted into 30 athymic female OVX mice at 7 weeks of age. Three days later, 1 million MCF-7 human breast cancer cells suspended in matrigel were subcutaneously injected into two sites on each flank, for a total of 4 tumors per mouse. When average tumor size reached 17.6 mm2, E2pellets were removed and a lower dose of E2in sealed silastic tubing (1:31 estrogen:cholesterol, 3 mg total weight) was implanted. When average tumor size reached 23.5 mm2, 15 mice retained E2silastic tubes (+E2group) and 15 mice received silastic tubes containing only cholesterol (-E2group). Tumors were measured every 4 days with a caliper. Tumor cross sectional area was calculated as (a/2)*(b/2)*3.14, where a and b were the measured diameters of each tumor. Upon termination of the experiments, mice were euthanized and tumors were excised. Analysis was performed using publically available tumors cohorts. ERa and UPR gene expression profiles of histologically normal breast epithelium (GSE20437)Nonewere compared to IDC tumors from ERa+breast cancer patients (GSE20194). ERa and UPR correlation analysis was performed on 278 invasive ductal carcinoma samples (GSE20194). NoneA "UPR Gene Signature" was constructed to carry out risk prediction analysis. The UPR gene signature was evaluated for its ability to predict: (i) tumor relapse in 261 early-stage ERa+breast cancers (GSE6532),None(ii) tumor relapse in 474 ERa+patients receiving solely tamoxifen therapy for 5 years (GSE6532, GSE17705),None,Noneand (iii) overall survival in a mixed-cohort of 236 breast cancer patients (GSE3494). NoneMicroarray data analysis was performed using BRB ArrayTools (version 4.2.1) and R software version 2.13.2. Gene expression values from CEL files were normalized by use of the standard quantile normalization method. NonePearson correlation tests and Spearman log rank tests were used to determine gene expression correlation coefficients. Wald tests were used to test whether UPR genes were predictive of tumor recurrence and overall survival. Univariate and multivariate hazard ratios were estimated using Cox regression analysis. Covariates statistically significant in univariate analysis were further assessed in multivariate analysis. A patient was excluded from multivariate analysis, if data for one or more variables was missing. Risk prediction using the UPR gene signature was carried out using the supervised principle components method,Noneand visualized using Kaplan-Meier plots and compared using log-rank tests. Calcium measurements are reported as mean +/- SE. All other data is reported as mean +/- S.E.M. Two-tailed student's t-test used for comparisons between groups. One-way ANOVA followed by Fisher's LSD or Tukey's post hoc test used for multiple comparisons. P less than 0.05 was considered significant.