Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors (MPNSTs) are aggressive, metastatic, nerve-associated tumors, which occur sporadically (~50% cases) or in association with the inherited syndrome Neurofibromatosis Type 1 (NF1)None. The lifetime risk of developing a sporadic MPNST is 0.001%, compared to 5-13% for NF1 patients (1:3,000 people) where MPNSTs often arise from pre-existing plexiform neurofibromasNone,None. Despite advances in understanding MPNST biology, the primary treatment of MPNSTs, regardless of origin, is tumor resection followed by radiation and non-specific chemotherapeutic agents resulting in 5-year survival rates of less than 25% in patients with metastatic diseaseNone-None. The most commonly altered gene known to cause benign neurofibroma formation and further progression into MPNST isNF1, which encodes Neurofibromin 1, a RAS-GTPase activating protein that causes NF1 syndrome when mutatedNone-None. NF1mutation causes increased and aberrant signaling through pro-growth and pro-proliferation signaling pathways (RAS/MAPK/ERK and PI3K/AKT/mTOR) in human neurofibromas and MPNST-derived cell linesNone-None. Overexpression of growth factor receptors and ligands likeEGFR,NRG,PDGF,HGF,SCF, andTGFbeta1are also observed in neurofibromas and MPNSTs withNF1mutationNone-None. BesidesNF1mutations, genomic aberrations have not been identified in neurofibromas. However, genomic aberrations including deletions and/or mutations of cell cycle regulators (TP53, RB1, and CDKN2A), gene amplification of growth factor receptors (ERBB2, EGFR, KIT, MET, and PDGFR), and the presence of hyperdiploid or near-triploid genomes commonly occur in human MPNSTsNone-None. These observations suggest that progression to malignancy requires many cooperating genomic alterations. High levels of genomic complexity make the identification of human MPNST genetic drivers difficult and leave the following questions unanswered: 1) What gene(s) cooperate withNF1loss for MPNST formation? 2) What additional gene modules cooperate for MPNST formation? 3) What are the epigenetically altered drivers of MPNST formation? 4) What is the signature/identity of MPNST maintenance genes? Though some genes and genetic pathways are implicated in MPNST development, there are still many left to uncover to create effective therapies for human MPNST treatment. Recently, theSleeping Beauty(SB) transposon system was utilized, in a tissue-specific manner in mice, to identify genetic drivers of numerous solid and blood cancersNone-None. To identify MPNST drivers, we targetedSBtransposon mutagenesis to Schwann cells and their precursors using theCnp-Cretransgene and a conditionalSBmutagenesis systemNone,None. Since mutations/deletions inTP53and/or amplification or elevated expression ofEGFRare commonly associated with human MPNSTs (24-75% and 25-70%, respectively), a conditional dominant-negativeTrp53Noneallele and aCnp-EGFRtransgene were includedNone,None-None. Analysis of 375SB-accelerated PNSTs uncovered 745 common-insertion site (CIS) associated genes (known and novel). We also identified genes and signaling pathways that cooperate for MPNST formation. We identified several novel proto-oncogenes, includingFoxr2and described new functions forFOXR2in human MPNST formation and maintenance. Thus, utilizing theSBmutagenesis system, we identified genes and genetic pathways that may provide new therapeutic targets for MPNST treatment. Four experimental mouse cohorts underwentSBmutagenesis on wildtype or tumor pre-disposing backgrounds followingCnp-Creinduction in Schwann cells and their precursors (Supplementary Fig. 1a)None,None,None,None. Mice lacking full components forSBmutagenesis served as controls. Predominantly, theCnp-EGFR(hereafter called EGFR-overexpressing) andCnp-Cre; Cnp-EGFR; Trp53None(hereafter called EGFR-overexpressing and p53-mutant) mice with or withoutSBmutagenesis developed nerve-associated tumors throughout the body (Supplementary Table 1,Supplementary Fig. 1b). Nerve-associated tumors possessed histological features of Schwann cell tumor stages: Schwann cell hyperplasia, benign grade 1 PNSTs (neurofibromas), and aggressive grade 3 PNSTs (MPNST in humans) (Supplmentary Fig. 1c-d). Mouse grade 3 PNSTs developed in anatomical regions observed in human MPNSTs (Supplementary Fig. 2a-b)None,None,None. Moreover, some control andSB-derived grade 3 PNSTs contained regions of divergent cellular histological subtypes and differentiation events characteristic of some human MPNSTs (Supplementary Fig. 3a-b)None-None. Neurofibromas displayed no divergent differentiation. Collectively, our mouse model data indicate that the common genetic changes in human MPNST produce a phenotype in mice that resembles the human disease. To determine ifSBmutagenesis accelerated tumor formation,SBexpression and activity in neurofibromas and grade 3 PNSTs were first confirmed by immunohistochemistry and by PCR-excision assay (Supplementary Fig. 1e)None. Wildtype or p53-mutant mice undergoing transposition developed few Schwann cell tumors (~2-7%) (Figure 1a). As previously reported, EGFR-overexpressing mice developed nerve hyperplasia with low incidence of neurofibroma formation (~17%) and no grade 3 PNST formation (Figure 1a)None. In contrast,SBmutagenesis significantly enhanced neurofibroma formation (~35%, p=0.0155) and induced grade 3 PNST formation in EGFR-overexpressing mice (p=0.0141). EGFR-overexpresing and p53-mutant transgenes cooperated to significantly increase neurofibroma and grade 3 PNST formation (p less than 0.0001,Figure 1a). SBmutagenesis on both pre-disposed alleles led to neurofibroma development, significantly increased grade 3 PNST development (p=0.0005), and significantly reduced grade 3 PNST free-survival compared to both pre-disposed alleles alone (p less than 0.0001,Figure 1b). Tumor penetrance for each genotype is summarized inSupplementary Table 1. Overall,SBmutagenesis enhanced grade 3 PNST incidence compared to controls. T2/Onc insertion sites from 269SB-derived neurofibromas and 106SB-derived grade 3 PNSTs from 100 mice were analyzed to identify driver-mutations (CISs). We utilized two statistical methods to identify CISs: TAPDANCE CIS (td-CIS) and gene centric CIS (gCIS) analyses (See methods for details,Supplementary Data 1-2,Table 1,Supplementary Table 2)None,None. td-CIS analysis identified 511 neurofibroma and 34 grade 3 PNST driver-mutations with 21 genes overlapping. gCIS analysis identified 535 neurofibroma and 75 grade 3 PNST driver-mutations with 32 genes overlapping. Accounting for coinciding CISs from each analysis, there were 87 grade 3 PNST (25.3% overlap) and 695 neurofibroma driver-mutations (50.1% overlap) with 37 genes common to both tumor types. Analysis of td-CIS association with tumor type identified significant driver-mutations in neurofibromas (n=47) and grade 3 PNSTs (n=10) (Table 1,Supplementary Table 2,Supplementary Fig. 4a-b). Known Schwann cell tumor suppressor genes (TSG),Nf1andPten, were significantly associated with grade 3 PNSTs and identified in 34.9% (p=8.04E-06) and 30.2% (p=3.85E-06) of tumors, respectivelyNone,None. In neurofibromas,Nf1andPteninsertions contributed to 16.4% and 14.1% of tumors, respectively. The most commonly mutated neurofibroma CISs wereCsmd1(46.8%, p=1.12E-05),Utrn(30.5%, p=0.02189) andZbtb20(29.4%, p=1.15E-05). Genes previously implicated in human MPNST formation were also identified:Bmpr2(9.4%, p=0.005),Jak2(5.7%, p=0.0013), andNf2(5.7%, p=0.0013). The position/orientation of the T2/Onc murine stem cell virus (MSCV) promoter relative to the direction of gene transcription can be used to predict whether T2/Onc is likely to drive or disrupt gene transcriptionNone. Transcriptional activation may occur if the majority of transposon insertions are orientated upstream of a gene or translational start site with MSCV promoters in the same direction as gene transcription; the gene would be a putative proto-oncogene (e.g. Eras,Foxr2, andZfp521)(Supplementary Fig. 5a,Supplementary Table 3). Disruption of transcription may occur if the transposons land within a gene with no MSCV promoter orientation or insertion site bias within the locus; the gene would be a putative TSG (e.g. Nf1andPten) (Supplementary Fig. 5b,Supplementary Table 3). Twenty putative proto-oncogenes and sixty-seven putative TSGs were identified in grade 3 PNST CISs (Table 1,Supplementary Table 3). Relevance of the CIS-associated genes to human MPNST formation was evaluated by cross-species comparative analysis of the grade 3 PNST CISs to previously generated human array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH), single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) arrays, human microarray expression, and methylome data from normal Schwann cells, neurofibromas, and MPNSTs (Figure 2)None,None,None. Utilizing human MPNST aCGH data, we identified CISs with a tendency toward CNA-gains (n=31,ZBTB10, CDK13, RAB2A, SHFM1, CPNE3) and CNA-losses (n= 34,CDKN2A,JAK2,NF1, NF2, FAF1, PLAA, PICLAM) (Supplementary Table 4,Figure 2,Supplementary Fig. 6-7)None. Comparably, whole genome SNP analysis on additional MPNSTs (n=14) identified several CISs in chromosomal regions gained (BMPR2, CPNE3, EML4) and lost (CDKN2A, JAK2, PLAA) in greater than 35% of the samples (Supplementary Table 5). However, many recurrently gained/lost genes were found in regions of large chromosomal rearrangements making it difficult to discern whether they are driver or passenger mutations. To address this concern, methylome and microarray expression data from human Schwann cell tumors were analyzed. Promoter CpG Island Shore (CpG-IS) methylation status is predictive of gene expression: hypermethylation is associated with gene silencing and hypomethylation is associated with gene expressionNone. We used MPNST whole methylome data to analyze the methylation patterns of the promoter CpG-IS regionsNone. Fifty-five CIS genes showed significant differential hypo- or hyper-methylation patterns in their CpG-IS regions (see Online Methods,Supplementary Table 6,Figure 2). Six CISs displayed hypomethylation in greater than 10% of tumors (BMPR2, PRDX1, PTPN14, BAZ1B, JMY, MAEA), while onlyKLF13was hypermethylated in greater than 10% of MPNSTs. To assess the impact of CNAs and methylation patterns on gene expression, we utilized microarray expression data. Seventy-seven CISs had a human homolog on the microarray (Supplementary Fig. 8)None. Microarray expression data predict CISs either upregulated (EIF4ENIF1, EML4, PTCH1, TRIP10, ZBTB10, ZNF217, ZNF521) or downregulated (TAOK1, PICALM, NF1, NF2, SPAG9, SRGAP2, PTEN) in disease progression to MPNSTs (Supplementary Fig. 8,Figure 2). Overall, genes we predicted to be oncogenes and TSGs from the SB screen displayed the expected biases in overexpression/CNA-gains/hypomethylation and reductions in gene expression/CNA-losses/hypermethylation (Figure 2). These genes include known drivers of MPNST formation (CDKN2A, PTEN, NF1) and novel candidate drivers (BAZ1B, FOXR2, ERAS, PLAA, DIP2C, PICALM). Lastly, we utilized the catalog of somatic mutations in cancer (COSMIC-v63) database to assess alterations of the CISs in other human cancers (Supplementary Table 7)None. The grade 3 PNST CIS list is significantly enriched for in the Cancer Gene Census (12/488 genes, FET p=2.99x10-06, hypergeometric test p=3.206496x10-06) indicating we identified driver-mutations common to many cancer types. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) and the Database for Annotations, Visualization and Integrated Discover (DAVID) were used to identify significantly altered signaling pathways in grade 3 PNST CISs (Supplementary Tables 8-9). IPA identified significant enrichment in cancer-associated signaling pathways (p=8.69x10-09-3.89x10-03, n=25 genes) including PI3K/AKT (p=1.55x10-03), ERK/MAPK (p=3.79x10-02), Wnt/CTNNB1 (p=5.20x10-04) and BMP/TGF-beta (p=4.15x10-02). Cell cycle regulation was the most significantly altered pathway (n=21 genes, p=9.87x10-07-3.89x10-03and n=6 genes, FET p=2.85x10-05, respectively). Additional cancer-associated signaling pathways included Jak-STAT (FET p=5.90x10-03) and TGF-beta (FET p=8.40x10-03). Combining data from DAVID analysis, IPA, and literature reviews, we classified the CISs into three major signal transduction pathways implicated in MPNST development: PI3K/AKT/mTOR (16.1%), MAPK/ERK/JNK/p38 (21.8%), and Wnt/CTNNB1 (17.2%) (Figure 3a)None,None-None. Seven CISs (Bmpr2, Cbp, Dyrk1a, Mark2, Mycn, Ppp2r2a, Pten) are involved in signaling through all three pathways as canonical members and/or effectors. Co-occurrence analysis was performed to identify genes frequently mutated together in grade 3 PNSTs at a higher frequency than expected by chanceNone. Co-occurrence analysis of the 34 td-CISs identified 99 pairs of co-occurring CISs (co-CIS) (Supplementary Table 10). Several genes were identified as co-CISs with the known MPNST driverNf1: Pten,Dyrk1a,Ppp6r3,Taok1,Picalm,Top2b,Srgap2, andCcny(Supplementary Table 10,Figure 3b). Nf1andPtenwere present in the highest percentage of tumors as single CISs (34.9% and 30.2% respectively,Table 1) and co-occurred in 13/106 grade 3 PNSTs (FET p=7.05x10-05) compared to 1/269 neurofibromas (Figure 4a). Human microarray expression data demonstrated a reduction inNF1andPTENwith disease progression to MPNSTs. (Supplementary Fig. 8). These data suggest that co-occurring mutations inNf1andPtencooperate to form grade 3 PNSTs and may cooperate in human MPNST progression. To address whetherNf1andPtenmutations cooperate to form Schwann cell tumorsin vivo, we generated transgenic mice with biallelic inactivation ofNf1and heterozygous loss ofPteninCnp-Creexpressing cells. Cnp-Cre; Nf1None;PtenNonemice had a significantly decreased median survival of 101 days compared to controlCnp-Cre; Nf1None(185 days, Logrank p=0.017) andCnp-Cre; PtenNone(323 days, Logrank p less than 0.0001) mice (Figure 4b). Cnp-Cre; Nf1None;PtenNonemice (n=5) succumbed to paralysis-related deaths with peripheral nerve hyperplasia and tumors, the majority of which were grade 1 neurofibromas (Figure 4c). Importantly, grade 1 neurofibromas in the extremities (sciatic nerve, brachial plexus) contained regions of high-grade PNST histology (Figure 4d). Cnp-Cre; Nf1Nonemice (n=4) developed nerve hyperplasia and neurofibromas but no high-grade PNSTs. Cnp-Cre; PtenNonemice (n=15) developed hematopoietic malignancies rather than Schwann cell-related phenotypes. These data are consistent with our previous experiments in whichDhh-Cre; Nf1None;PtenNonemice only developed neurofibromas, whileCnp-Cre; Nf1None;PtenNonemice had shorter median survival and possessed regions of high-grade PNST developmentNone. Both mouse models demonstrate the cooperativity ofNf1andPtenmutations for accelerating Schwann cell tumorigenesis. Additional cooperating mutations identified in the co-occurrence analysis may provide insight into cooperating signaling pathways that promote MPNST formation in humans. Foxr2is a grade 3 PNST CIS predicted to be a proto-oncogene due to the orientation and position of T2/Onc insertions (Figure 5a). mRNA fusion transcripts between the T2/Onc MSCV promoter/SD andFoxr2were identified in tumors with T2/Onc insertions in theFoxr2locus (Figure 5b). The sequenced products demonstrated splicing from the T2/Onc splice donor into each exon of theFoxr2gene, including a cryptic exon not previously annotated in intron 2 (labeled 2') (Figure 5a-b). T2/Onc fusion transcripts led to increasedFoxr2mRNA and protein expression in tumors and tumor-derived cell lines, suggesting thatFoxr2functions as a proto-oncogene (Figures 5c-e). Immunohistochemical analysis of a human tissue microarray demonstrated increased cytoplasmic FOXR2 expression in MPNSTs compared to neurofibromas (Figure 6a-b). FOXR2mRNA and protein levels were increased in MPNST cell lines compared to normal Schwann cells andCDK4/TERTimmortalized human Schwann cells (iHSCs) (Figure 6c)None. MPNST cell lines also demonstrated cytoplasmic FOXR2 expression (Figure 6d). FOXR2is a novel gene with unknown function. To explore the role ofFOXR2in MPNST formation, we developed constructs to overexpress the full-length cDNA or knock out the gene using TAL-effector nucleases (TALENs) (Supplementary Fig. 9a-b) in iHSCs and MPNST cell linesNone,None. FOXR2overexpression in the iHSC clone HSC1lambda increased total FOXR2 protein and cytoplasmic staining, minimally increasedin vitroproliferation, and significantly increased soft-agar colony formation compared to luciferase control (two-tailed t-test p less than 0.0001) (Figure 7a-c,Supplementary Fig. 10a). Xenograft experiments demonstrated no tumor formation in the control HSC1lambda cells, but 3/5 mice harboringFOXR2overexpressing cells developed a tumor (Supplementary Fig. 11a-b). This phenotype was confirmed by TALEN-mediated targeted knockout ofFOXR2in S462-TY and STS26T human MPNST cell lines (Supplementary Fig. 9b). TALENs that generated knockout or heterogeneous mutations (called mutation detected) ofFOXR2caused loss of protein by western blot analysis (Supplementary Fig. 9c,Figure 7d). FOXR2knockout and mutation detected cell lines had reduced proliferation and significant reductions in colony formation ability compared toHPRTknockout control cells (t-test p less than 0.0001) (Supplementary Fig. 10b-c,Figure 7e). Additionally,FOXR2loss inhibited the ability of STS26T cells to form tumors in xenograft experiments compared toHRPTknockout controls (Figure 7f). shRNA-mediatedFOXR2knockdown in STS26T and S462-TY cell lines confirmed theFOXR2TALEN resultsin vitro(Supplementary Fig. 10d-e). Collectively,FOXR2has minor effects on proliferationin vitro,whereas effects on anchorage independent growth and tumorigenicity are more profound. We performed a large, forward genetic screen in Schwann cells utilizingSBsomatic cell mutagenesis. We identified hundreds of genes that cooperated withEGFRoverexpression and p53-loss of function to form neurofibromas and grade 3 PNSTs. Many co-CISs were identified, suggesting that specific, cooperating genetic mutations are required for tumor development. Also, CISs were identified in known signaling pathways altered in human MPNSTs: Wnt/CTNNB1, PI3K/Akt/mTor, and growth factor signalingNone-None,None. Lastly, we identified several novel proto-oncogenes, includingFoxr2,and elucidated a role forFOXR2in human MPNST maintenance. SBmutagenesis alone or on theTrp53Nonebackground was insufficient for Schwann cell tumorigenesis compared to previous reports in whichSBalone caused tumorsNone,None. This may be explained by differences in the number of cells susceptible toSBmutagenesis. Compared to colonic epithelial cells, which have a high turnover rate, that of Schwann cells is near zero unless injury occursNone,None. Moreover,SBmutagenesis is a random event, and mutations that confer selective advantage for clonal outgrowth are rare events. Taken together, targeting a small population of cells with a low turnover rate may produce fewerSB-induced tumors unless a pre-existing mutation(s), such as EGFR-overexpression, is present to expand target cell populationsNone. CIS overlap between two methods for defining CISs in grade 3 PNSTs and neurofibromas was 65% and 68%, respectively (Table 1,Supplementary Table 2). The discordance in CIS calling is based predominantly on methods used to identify a CISNone,None. gCIS analysis is based on window sizes corresponding to annotated genes and 15,000bp upstream to account for the promoter regionNone. Therefore, the number of insertions required to be deemed a gCIS depends on gene size (i.e., large genes require many insertions while smaller genes require fewer insertions). TAPDANCE analysis generates random window sizes throughout the genome and does not require gene annotation to identify CISs, as 4 'gene barren' regions were identified in the neurofibroma CIS list (Supplementary Table 2)None. These regions could contain important enhancer elements, unannotated genes, non-coding RNAs, or other gene regulatory elements. The two methods are complimentary and enhance CIS identification. Based on the number of neurofibromas (n=269) and grade 3 PNSTs (n=106) sequenced, there is a disproportionate number of CISs between neurofibromas (695) and grade 3 PNSTs (87). Analysis of unique transposon insertion site non-redundant (nr) regions identified 33,022 and 139,543 nr-regions for grade 3 PNSTs and neurofibromas, respectively. This discrepancy can be reconciled by the genetic heterogeneity of theSB-induced tumors. The fewer grade 3 PNSTs nr-regions were sequenced at a higher frequency compared to the neurofibroma nr-regions, suggesting that few cells acquired mutations in strong genetic drivers that conferred a selective advantage for clonal outgrowth. These clonal insertions were sequenced thousands of times more than in the more genetically heterogeneous neurofibromas. Additionally, it is possible only a few, strong driver mutations in Schwann cells are required for progression to grade 3 PNSTs, while there are many alterations that are sufficient to cause neurofibroma formation. For example, cells may achieve many mutations but only the right combination of two or more genes may drive high-grade tumor formation, as we observed in theNf1/Ptenmodel. Lastly, we can reliably identify low-penetrant CISs with higher statistical power given the larger neurofibroma sample size compared to the grade 3 PNSTs. CIS analysis identified a disproportionate number of putative TSGs compared to proto-oncogenes (Table 1,Supplementary Table 2), which also occurred in other solid tumor SB screensNone,None,Noneand likely has several explanations: 1) The strength of the T2/Onc MSCV promoter is not strong enough to sufficiently transcriptionally activate proto-oncogenes. A body-wide SB screen using the CAGGs promoter instead of MSCV in T2/Onc identified a larger spectrum of tumors and CISsNone. 2) T2/Onc can insert in both orientations with less insertion position bias within or near a gene to cause inactivation meaning a greater chance of genes being inactivated. Alternatively, for driving oncogenes we observed a clustering of T2/Onc insertions in the promoter region or 5'UTR that predominantly orient to drive transcription. Comparative genomic analysis reliably identified genes previously implicated in human MPNST formation (i.e.,CDKN2A,NF1,PTEN)None,None. We also identified novel genes recurrently overexpressed/CNA-gains/hypomethylated (BAZ1B, FOXR2, ERAS) and underexpressed/biallelically inactivated/hypermethylated (DIP2C, PLAA, PICALM) in human MPNSTs (Figure 2,Supplementary Figs. 6-8,Supplementary Tables 4-6)None,None. However, we identified genes (e.g.,ZBTB10andEML4) with CNA gains in human MPNSTs predicted to be disrupted by SB mutagenesis. This discrepancy may reflect differences in mouse versus human MPNST formation and/or CNAs observed in human MPNSTs may mask the function of the gene in tumor progression. Additionally, many of the CISs could be categorized into signaling pathways (PI3K/AKT/mTOR, MAPK/ERK/JNK/p38, and Wnt/CTNNB1) (Figure 3a,Supplementary Tables 8-9). Collectively, these data provide novel gene drivers/signaling pathways that potentially promote human MPNST formation. Further experimental evidence is required to determine the contribution any candidate driver gene(s)/pathways may have on MPNST development. Nf1andPtenwere most frequently mutated in our screen,andPtenwas significantly co-mutated withNf1in grade 3 PNSTs. Loss ofNF1alone is not sufficient for MPNST formation in genetically engineered mouse models ofNf1lossNone-None. Gregorian et. al demonstrated that monoallelic inactivation ofPtenin Schwann cells with activatedKRasNoneoverexpression caused grade 3 PNST formationNone. Neither mutation alone was sufficient to generate grade 3 PNSTs. These data suggest that, likeNf1,Ptenmutations alone are insufficient for MPNST formation. Our mouse model of biallelicNf1inactivation andPtenheterozygosity demonstrated cooperation for high-grade PNST formation compared to loss of either allele alone (Figure 3a-d). We attempted to generate biallelic loss ofNf1andPtenwith theCnp-cremodel, but no live mouse originated from the crosses with the expected Mendelian ratio of 1:8. Cnp-Cre; Nf1None; PtenNonemay be embryonic lethal. However,Nf1loss in the context ofPtenheterozygosity produced tumors with regions containing high-grade PNSTs, which is consistent with the observation thatPTENexpression is not completely lost in human MPNSTs. The previously reportedDhh-Cre; Nf1None; PtenNonemouse model presented with neurofibromas and required biallelic inactivation of the secondPtenallele for high-grade PNST formationNone. Therefore, it is important to consider gene dosage, co-mutations, and timing of mutation induction to determine effective mouse models for developmental and therapeutic studies. FOXR2is a forkhead-box (FOX) transcription factor family member identifiedin silicoon chromosome Xp11.21 in humans. FOXR2is an ortholog ofFOXR1that shares 57.7% amino acid identityNone. FOXR1 is a transcriptional inhibitor of FOX family target genes such asp27Kip1None. Similar toFOXR1,FOXR2is expressed in mouse embryonic development (E9.5) with reduced expression in adult tissuesNone. Human Protein Atlas and ONCOMINE indicate FOXR2 expression is low and variegated in normal adult human tissues, but expression is increased at the genomic (CNA gains) and protein levels in several cancersNone-None. COSMIC-v63 reports 18 point mutations withinFOXR2from 4,862 samplesNone. We utilized the MutationAssessor program to determine the functional impact of the 18 point mutations on cancer, which ranged from neutral to medium with 4 point-mutations identified in the Fork-head DNA binding domain (Supplementary Table 12). This may indicate thatFOXR2mutations are not as pivotal to cancer formation as increased expression. Our comparative genomic analysis and functional data predict thatFOXR2is a proto-oncogene in human MPNST maintenance. FOX superfamily members have been implicated in human cancers through mechanisms like gene amplifications and translocationsNone. Further studies are warranted to determine the extent of FOXR2 involvement in tumor development and its function in normal somatic cells. Interestingly, in the grade 3 PNSTs containingT2/Onc-Foxr2fusion transcripts we observed splicing into the first annotated exon ofFoxr2where splice acceptor elements were not previously described (Figure 5). We identified RNA splicing elements (branch point 'A', polyprimidine tract, and 'AG' boundary) within 35 nucleotides of the first annotatedFoxr2exon indicating the potential for splicing. Furthermore,FOXR2full-length cDNA unexpectedly encodes two unique protein isoforms (Figure 7b,d), and we observed a bias in isoform loss following TALEN knockout (Figure 7d). TheFOXR2locus contains five in-frame methionines of which four have optimal Kozak sequences (amino acid positions 1, 25, 53, 58, and 81) with the following predicted molecular weights: 35.93kDa, 32.94 kDa, 29.76kDa, 29.17kDa, and 26.81kDas. Further studies are necessary to define the Foxr2 locus in mouse and human and to determine the implications of the use of the alternative start codons in tumorigenesis. Overall, using aSBforward genetic screen we identified hundreds of candidate cancer driver genes that promote Schwann cell tumorigenesis. Moreover, we determined a new functional role for the novel proto-oncogeneFOXR2in human MPNST maintenance. Further functional testing of additional CISs may reveal new genetic pathways to target for treatment of human MPNSTs. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis,http://www.ingenuity.com; Catalogue of Somatic Mutations in Cancer - COSMIC,http://www.sanger.ac.uk/genetics/CGP/cosmic/; Oncomine,http://www.oncomine.org/; Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery - DAVID,http://david.abcc.ncifcrf.gov; gene centric CIS analysis,http://ias.eng.uiowa.edu/uploader/; UCSC Genome Browser,http://genome.ucsc.edu; Mutation Assessor program,http://mutationassessor.org/, TALE-NT (https://boglab.plp.iastate.edu/node/add/talen)Three transgenes were used to induce SB mutagenesis in Schwann cells: a conditionally expressedSBtransposase enzyme (R26-lsl-SB11)None, a Schwann cell specific Cre-recombinase controlled by the CNP promoter (Cnp-Cre)None, and a concatomer of oncogenic transposons (T2/Onc15)None. Triple transgenic mice (Cnp-Cre; R26-lsl-SB11; T2/Onc15) undergo insertional mutagenesis in Schwann cells. MPNST predisposing alleles,Cnp-EGFRand conditionalTrp53Nonealleles, were also includedNone,None. Mouse cohorts are shown inFigure 1a. Genotyping PCR was performed on phenol-chloroform extracted mouse-tail DNA as previously describedNone,None,None,None. Peripheral nerves and tumors were resected, assessed, and histologically evaluated as previously describedNone. Each sample was pathologically graded using established criteria for tumors generated in genetically engineered mouse models (GEMM)None. Grade 1 PNSTs are called neurofibromas. Tumors with features of human MPNSTs (GEMM grade 3 PNSTs) are called grade 3 PNSTs. DNA isolated fromSB-derived neurofibromas and grade 3 PNSTs underwent linker-mediated PCR to amplify transposon-genomic DNA junctions and were sequenced as previously describedNone. Identification of TAPDANCE CISs and gene centric CISs from sequenced transposon-genomic DNA PCR products was performed as previously describedNone,None. The local-hopping phenomenon of T2/Onc was accounted for by excluding chromosome 15 (T2/Onc donor locus) from the analysis. Known CIS artifacts originating from the T2/Onc sequence elements (En2,Foxf2) and amplified regions of the mouse genome (Serinc3,Sfi) were also excludedNone,None. Thirty-three histologically normal nerves from SB mutagenized mice were sequenced to assess potential transposon integration hotspots; no CISs were identified. Published data (GEO accession #:GSE14038, Affymetrix GeneChip HU133 Plus 2.0) were used for gene expression pattern analysis. For gene annotation, custom CDF (custom GeneChip library file) based on RefSeq target definitions (Hs133P REFSEQ Version 8) was downloaded and used to provide accurate interpretation of GeneChip dataNone. Statistical comparisons were done using R/Bioconductor packages and GeneSpring GX v7.3.1 (Agilent Technologies). Differentially expressed (DE)-genes were defined as genes with expression levels at least three-fold higher or lower in target groups (MPNST) compared to normal human Schwann cells (NHSCs) after applying Benjamini and Hochberg false discovery rate correction (FDR/BH p less than = 0.05)None. Feber et al. published unbiased whole-methylome data of NHSCs, neurofibroma, and MPNST genomes (GEO accession #: GSE21714)None. We adopted the Feber et al. method for detecting differentially methylated regions (DMR) in MPNST compared to NHSCNone,None. Briefly, Batman methylation scores per 100bp were averaged for each 1Kb window. A conservative threshold for DMR calling was used based on the 95th percentile of the difference in methylation score. DMR regions were mapped to human genome hg18 version (Build NCBI-36). The nearest CpG island shores (CpG-IS) to the transcription start sites (TSS) of each gene/miRNA were scannedNone,None. We defined CpG-IS as areas up to 2Kb distant from CpG islands. We considered the nearest upstream CpG-IS from the transcription start site, within 5K bp ranges from each TSS. The genomic coordinates of miRNAs, genes, and CpG islands (NCBI36/hg18) were extracted from corresponding tracks of UCSC Genome Browser (http://genome.ucsc.edu). For intragenic miRNAs, we assumed their expression is influenced by the nearest CpG-IS to the TSS of their host gene. CNA data on 51 primary MPNSTs were from the published GSE3388 data set (Agilent Human Genome CGH Microarray kit (4x44K)None,None. A circular binary segmentation (CBS) algorithm was applied to the log2 ratios of intensity values from tumor and normal to reduce local noise effects. CBS calculates a likelihood-ratio statistic for each array probe by permutation to locate change-pointsNone. After segmentation step, CGHcall algorithm was used to assign each segment an aberration label: gain, loss, or normalNone. A visualization program was written in R to present overall gain/loss patterns of all 51 MPNSTs. We considered a given genomic region as significantly recurrent CNA region if the number of CNA labels (gain or loss) given to them exceeded a threshold of statistical significance that we estimated using a permutation test. Briefly, CNA labels, three state calls (gain/loss/normal) by CGHcall algorithm, of the targets were permuted 10,000 times to get distribution, and sums of gain or loss labels were computed for each target. The 95th percentile values for both sums (23 patients out of 51) were chosen as thresholds of statistically significant recurrent CNA. Genomic coordinates used in plots were based on hg19/GRCh37.p8 (R/Bioconductor biomaRt package)None. SNP-array analysis was performed on 14 MPNST primary tumors using the Illumina Infinium technology (Illumina, San Diego, CA). Tumors were analyzed using the Illumina Human660W-Quad beadchip. The data were processed with GenoCNA to segment the genome and determine copy number statusNone. Representative areas of disease were identified on hematoxylin and eosin-stained sections for 30 dermal neurofibromas, 31 plexiform neurofibromas, and 32 MPNSTs. Blocks consisting of duplicate 1.0 mm core samples were constructed with a manual tissue arrayer (MTA-1, Beecher Inc, WI) with 64 cores per recipient block. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) for FOXR2 (1:100, SIGMA) was performed utilizing an immunohistochemical staining platform (Nemesis 7200, Biocare) following standard IHC protocolsNone. Digital images of IHC stained TMA slides were obtained as previously described by Rizzardi et al. 2012None. Immortalized human Schwann cells (iHSCs) were acquired from the laboratory of Dr. Margaret Wallace. iHSCs and human MPNST cell lines (ST88-14, STS26T, S462, S462-TY, and T265) were cultured in complete media (1xDMEM, 10% fetal bovine serum, 1x penicillin/streptomycin) and grown at 37 degrees C in 5% CO2. shRNA GIPZ lentiviral constructs were purchased from Openbiosystems. Proliferation assays were setup in a 96-well plate format with 500 cells per well in full DMEM media containing 1ug/ml of puromycin (Life Technologies). Proliferation was assessed every 24 hours for 5 days using the MTS assay (Promega) following the manufacturer's protocols. Experiments were performed in triplicate. Soft agar anchorage independent colony formation assays were carried out as previously describedNone. After 2 weeks of growth, cells were fixed in 10% formalin containing 0.005% Crystal Violet for 1 hour at room temperature. Formalin was removed and colonies were imaged on a Leica S8 AP0 microscope. Twelve images per cell line were taken and automated colony counts were done using ImageJ software. FOXR2cDNA (Open Biosystems) was cloned into the Gateway Vector System (Invitrogen) and subcloned into apiggyBac(PB) transposon vector. ThePBcontrol vector contains theLuciferaseandGfpreporter genes. Cells were transfected with 2ug ofFOXR2orLuciferase PBtransposon (Supplementary Fig. 8a) and 500ng of PB7 transposase plasmid using the NEON transfection system following manufacturers protocols (Invitrogen). Successfully transfected cells were enriched with 1ug/ml puromycin. TALENs targetingFOXR2were designed using TALE-NT and constructed as previously describedNone-None. AnHPRTTALEN pair served as a controlNone. TALENs were assembled using Golden Gate cloning with the truncated Delta152+63 TALEN backboneNone,None. Assembled TALENs were tested by transient transfection into K562 cells using the NEON electroporation system (Invitrogen) and subsequent CEL-I assayNone. Knockout cell lines were generated using thePBCo-transposition method (Moriarity et al., unpublished data). Briefly, cells were electroporated with plasmids encoding the left and right TALENs, the hyperactivePB7transposase, and Puromycin encoding transposon vectors. TALEN-treated cells were incubated at 37 degrees C, 5% CO2 for 1 day followed by two days of 'cold shock' at 30 degrees C to increase nuclease activityNone. Cells were seeded at 50 cells per well in 96 well plates with Puromycin containing DMEM. Single cell clones were expanded, DNA was extracted, and CEL-I PCR was performed with amplicons sequenced via standard single pass Sanger sequencing (ACGT, Inc). Individual clone sequence data were analyzed for insertion/deletions (indels) formed by non-homologous end joining at the TALEN cut site and were classified as wildtype (WT), knockout (KO), or mutation detected (MD). Mutation detected clones were further analyzed by standard TOPO cloning and sequencing to determine the indels at each allele. 1ug of total RNA was DNase (Life Technologies) treated and used for reverse transcription with the Super Script III first strand synthesis kit (Life Technologies) following manufacturer's protocol. qPCR reactions utilized the LightCycler 480 SYBR I Green (Roche) and were analyzed on an Eppendorf Mastercycler ep gradient S. Primers are listed inSupplementary Table 12. Data were analyzed using the RealPlex software, calibrated toACTBlevels, and normalized to respective controls. FOXR2 protein was detected in whole cell lysates harvested with modified RIPA buffer (0.5% (vol/vol) NP-40, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA) containing phosphatase inhibitors (SIGMA) and a complete mini protease inhibitor pellet (Roche). Lysates were separated on a 10% resolving gel, transferred to PVDF membrane, and probed with antibodies against FOXR2 (SIGMA) and GAPDH (Cell Signaling Tech.) following manufacturers' protocols. Immunofluorescence on tissue sections and cell lines with antibodies probing FOXR2 (SIGMA) and CNPase (Santa Cruz) were carried out following manufacturers' protocols followed by incubation with fluorescently labeled secondary antibodies (Life Technologies). Slides were counter stained and mounted with anti-FADE Gold (Life Technologies) containing DAPI. Images were acquired using AxioVision software.