Instability of the lumbar spine is one of multiple pathologic causes of low back pain (LBP). None,NoneIt can be defined as a loss of motion stiffness such that forces applied to a given segment produce greater displacement than would occur normally. NoneSpondylolysis and spondylolisthesis can cause LBP because of instability. Spondylolysis is a bony defect, possibly a stress fracture, of one or both pars interarticularis and most commonly occurs in the lower lumbar spine (Figure 1). NonePrevalence of spondylolysis ranges from approximately 6% to 11.5% in the general populationNoneand approximately 7% to 8% in elite athletes; this percentage is grossly underreported. None,None,NoneNearly 50% of LBP cases in adolescent athletes have been attributed to spondylolysis. NoneSagittal fat-saturated T2-weighted image showing a defect of the right pars interarticularis at L4. Adjacent high signal in the marrow and soft tissues on the image reflects acute or subacute fracture. Repetitive microtrauma leading to spondylolysis has been attributed to lumbar hyperextension combined with rotation and loading. None,None,NoneThese injuries occur in dancers, gymnasts, figure skaters, weight lifters, and football playersNone,None; active spondylolysis has been reported in almost every sport. NoneSpondylolisthesis is displacement of a vertebra due to a defect in the pars (Figure 2). NoneSpondylolysis is a precipitating factor and can be classified as isthmic, dysplastic, degenerative, traumatic, and pathologic. None,None,NoneSpondylolisthesis severity can be graded I through IV. Grade I is displacement of 0% to 25%; grade II, 26% to 50%; and grade III, up to 75%. Displacement of 75% to 100% is grade IV. NoneRadiograph of fracture of pars interarticularis (yellow arrow) with grade II spondylolisthesis demonstrating slippage (black lines). Etiologic factors,Nonedegree of slippage,Noneand pathology typeNone,None,Nonereflect the heterogeneous nature of both spondylolysis and spondylolisthesis. Computed tomography, single-photon computed tomography, and magnetic resonance imaging techniques assist in the accurate diagnosis of spondylolysis and spondylolisthesis. Guidelines for these conditions remain elusive. None,None,NoneDevelopment of guidelines requires a systematic review of the current level of evidence. Consequently, the purpose of this review is to systematically review nonoperative methods of intervention as related to spondylolysis and spondylolisthesis. An electronic literature search of MEDLINE, CINAHL, and EMBASE databases was performed for articles published between 1966 and April 2012. The MESH search terms for MEDLINE included:(spondylolysis OR spondylolisthesis) AND (lumbar vertebrae OR lumbar spine) AND (physical therapy OR rehabilitation OR stabilization OR strengthening OR motor control OR massage OR joint mobilization OR joint manipulation OR manual therapy OR stretching OR conservative treatment OR therapy OR athletic OR training OR bracing), limited to the English language and human subjects. The reference lists were also checked to retrieve relevant publications. Gray literature (textbooks, abstracts presented at conferences, web information, etc) was also hand searched. Full-text articles were retrieved if the abstract provided insufficient information to establish eligibility or if the article had passed the first eligibility screening. All articles examining nonoperative treatment of spondylolysis and/or spondylolisthesis were eligible if they met all of the following criteria: (1) patients presenting with lumbar spine pain with primary diagnosis of spondylolysis and/or spondylolisthesis; (2) cohort, case control, and/or cross-sectional design; (3) inclusion of at least 1 nonoperative therapy for spondylolysis/listhesis (relevant to physical therapy or athletic training); and (4) article was in English. An article was excluded if (1) other pathologies were present, (2) nonoperative treatment was omitted, and (3) subjects were infants or toddlers. Criteria were independently applied by 2 reviewers (MG, JS). A third author (MR) was consulted to resolve disagreements. This screening resulted in 10 full-text articles for data extraction (Table 1andFigure 3). Description of included studiesSD, standard deviation; F, female patients; M, male patients; PT, physical therapy; wk, week; NSAIDs, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatories; RCT, randomized controlled trial. Flow diagram of study. Data on the study population, description, intervention, outcome measures, and results were independently extracted and cross-referenced (Tables 1-5; see appendix, available athttp://sph.sagepub.com/content/suppl). Injury and diagnostic demographicsBracing versus activity restriction: interventions, outcomes, and resultsSPECT, single-photon emission computed tomography. Bracing and direction-based PT versus placebo controlVAS, visual analog scale; FT, flexion treatment; ET, extension treatment; PC, placebo control. Exercise interventionsSD, standard deviation; EG, exercise group; CG, control group; ODI, Oswestry Disability Index; EMG, electromyography; IO, internal oblique; ROM, range of motion. The systematic search through MEDLINE, CINAHL, and EMBASE yielded 10 eligible studies for data extraction. Of these 10 studies, 5 were randomized controlled trials,None,None,None,None,None1 was a prospective randomized study,Noneand 4 were comparative studies without randomization or a control group. None,None,None,NoneOne study compared the use of brace treatment with activity restriction,None5 studies compared nonoperative care to surgical interventions,None,None,None,None,Noneand 3 studies compared exercise protocols. None,None,NoneOne remaining study compared a combination of bracing and specific exercise protocol with a placebo control group. NoneOne study included a combination of patients with spondylolysis and spondylolisthesis,None1 only spondylolysis,Nonewhile the remaining 8 used spondylolisthesis. None,None,None,NoneNone-None,None,NoneThe age of subjects in the studies varied widely: 2 had a mean subject age in the teens (13 and 13.8 years). None,NoneFour had mean ages in the 30s or 40s. None,None,None,NoneOne study did not report the age of the subjects. NoneThe 3 remaining studies had a mean age in the 60s. None,None,NoneThe 5 studies comparing nonoperative care to surgical interventions found nonoperative care was not as favorable as surgery. Grade of pathology was only reported in 2 of the 5 studies comparing nonoperative and surgical care (Table 2). These studies reported improvement in various pain ratings with fusions or laminectomies compared with strength and postural training,Nonepatients with diabetes receiving lumbar fusions or decompressions versus nondescript "conservative care,"Noneand patients undergoing decompressive laminectomy versus patients treated with physical therapy. None,NoneTwo studies used the same patient population to compare flexion exercises and extension exercises. None,NoneBoth found significant improvement in pain, return to work, and self-rated recovery in the flexion-based group. None,NoneAnother study compared lumbar stabilization exercises to general exercise and found significant improvement in functional score and pain rating in the stabilization group. NoneWhen bracing was combined with flexion or extension exercises and a placebo group, extension exercises and bracing showed significant improvements in pain ratings compared with the flexion group and placebo. NoneA study comparing immediate bracing versus initial activity modification found improved healing of pars interarticularis defects on SPECT imaging in patients braced immediately compared with those treated with activity modification. NoneFour studies found surgical intervention more successful than nonoperative treatment for treating pain and functional limitation. None,None,None,NoneOne found no difference between surgery and nonoperative treatment in regard to vertebral slip, damage to the L4-L5 disk, and low back pain. NoneOf the studies comparing nonoperative treatments, improvement was found in bracing,Nonebracing and exercises emphasizing lumbar extension,Nonerange of motion and strengthening exercises focusing on lumbar flexion,None,Noneand strengthening specific abdominal and lumbar muscles. NoneA previous review examined exercise interventions in these 2 conditions,Nonewhile this review included bracing, activity restriction, and surgical procedures. This review suggests surgical intervention is more effective than nonoperative treatments for pain and functional limitation in patients with spondylolisthesis when directly compared with each other. Studies that did compare the various nonoperative treatments revealed a variety of conclusions, ranging from no improvement with lumbar flexion exercises and bracingNoneto significant improvement with lumbar flexion exercisesNoneand significant improvement with specific muscle strengthening exercise. NonePrevious studies supported the use of various braces with children and adolescents involved in sport. Case series by Sys et alNoneand Iwamoto et alNoneeach found a high percentage of return to sport (89.3% and 87.5%, respectively) with nonoperative treatment and bracing. Repetitive extension and hyperextension, along with rotation, are risk factors for developing and aggravating spondylolysis and spondylolisthesis. None,None,NoneThe highest levels of stress on the pars interarticularis were found with lumbar extension and rotation. NoneSome patients have greater improvement with extension. NoneOlder subjects may have had simultaneous disk pathologies that responded positively to repetitive extension exercises and bracing. The deep multifidi exert compressive forces as well as aid in control of spinal motion at the segmental level. NoneTherefore, specific strengthening of these stabilizing muscles could be beneficial in an instability condition like spondylolysis or spondylolisthesis. However, muscle activity can be constrained with trunk strength training utilizing functional tasks. NoneNine of the 10 articles in this review described chronic spondylolysis and/or spondylolisthesis conditions. None,None,None,None,NoneNone-None,None,NoneOne study of the acute condition found that bracing was effective. NonePositive results with nonoperative treatments were seen within lower grade slippage (grades 0, 1, 2). None,NoneOnly 4 of 9 studies describing interventions for spondylolisthesis reported the degree of slippage, 1 study showed significant improvement with surgery over nonoperative care (98% of patients had grade 1 or 2 slips),None1 study showed no significant difference between surgery and nonoperative care (average slip in nonoperative group was 21.8%, in the surgery group, 45.2%),Noneand 2 studies found improvement with specific exercise compared with different exercise (100% of patients had a grade 2 or less slippage in one study, 92.3% and 77.7% of patients in the 2 exercise groups had a grade 1 slippage in the other study). None,NoneNo consensus can be reached on the role of nonoperative versus surgical care because of limited investigation and heterogeneity of studies reported. Current studies investigating both nonoperative and surgical outcomes for individuals with spondylolysis/spondylolisthesis are generally poorly defined and suffer from bias, lack of control groups, and blinding of assessors. Poor patient compliance was noted with many of the exercise programs. Many studies lacked uniform reporting of the spondylolisthesis grade, making it difficult to compare patient populations.