Pantothenate kinases (PanK) catalyze the rate-limiting step in the biosynthesis of CoA and regulate the concentration of this essential cofactor. None,NoneCoA is found in all living organisms, where it acts as an acyl group carrier in various synthetic and oxidative metabolic pathways such as the tricarboxylic acid cycle and fatty acid metabolism. Four closely related isoforms of PanKs have been identified in mammals: PanK1alpha, PanK1beta, PanK2, and PanK3, which are encoded by three genes. None-NoneRecently, the scientific community has shown interest in the PanK2 and PanK1 isoforms because of their role in PanK-associated neurodegeneration (PKAN) and diabetes, respectively. PKAN is a rare and neurological disorder caused by mutations in the humanPANK2gene. None,None,NonePKAN is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern and leads to progressive dystonia, dysarthria, parkinsonism, and pigmentary retinopathy. Classic PKAN develops around age 3, and most patients are at risk of early death because there are no FDA approved treatments for the disease. The PanK2 isoform is highly expressed in human neuronal tissues and thePANK2mutations are predicted to result in significantly lower CoA levels, thereby reducing neuronal metabolism and function in PKAN patients. Pank2knockout mice were generated to investigate the complex pathogenesis of PKAN but unfortunately did not reproduce the human disease. None,NoneThe singlePank1andPank2knockout mice did not show a neurodegenerative phenotype probably due to compensation by the other PanK enzymes. NoneDouble knockout mice were either embryonic lethal or died in the first few weeks after birth, making potential treatments difficult to test. NoneTherefore, the lack of tools to investigate the relationship between CoA levels and neurodegeneration limits our understanding of the mechanisms by whichPANK2mutations result in neurodegeneration. Limitation of the CoA supply by genetic deletion of PanK1 activity blunts the hepatic CoA increase in response to fasting and leads to a deficit in fatty acid oxidation and impaired gluconeogenesis. NoneThe key role of CoA in metabolic control is highlighted by the phenotype of thePank1-/-Lep-/-double knockout mouse. NoneThe abnormally high level of CoA in theLep-/-liver is reduced by the deletion of thePank1gene, resulting in normalization of the hyperglycemia and hyperinsulinemia characteristic of theLep-/-mouse. ThePank1-/-Pank2-/-double knockout mice have a severe metabolic phenotype related to decreased fatty acid and ketone oxidation and do not survive to weaning. NoneTaken together, these data demonstrate the impact of reduced intracellular CoA on oxidative metabolism and, in particular, the fuel switching during the transition from the fed to the fasted state. These data and the fact that a genome-wide studyNoneshowed an association betweenPANK1variants and insulin levels in humans suggest that PanK inhibitors may be useful therapeutics for type II diabetes. The above background and our interest in understanding CoA physiologic functions led us to hypothesize that it is possible to discover compounds acting as PanK modulators that can be used in animals to regulate CoA synthesis. One approach to PKAN treatment would be to identify PanK1 or PanK3 activators that would stimulate CoA synthesis in tissues lackingPANK2. The PanK inhibitors would serve as tools to investigate the role of CoA in adult tissues and accelerate the identification of bypass drugs to treat PKAN disease. Additionally, PanK inhibitors may have direct therapeutic application for type II diabetes. Recently, we reported a high throughput screening (HTS) study of 3200 unique molecules with known biological activity that identified small molecule inhibitors and activators of PanK. NoneHowever, the identified compounds could not be used as ideal probes for studying the role of PanK in a disease due to their higher affinity toward other proteins. Therefore, we decided to expand our high throughput screen to the larger, more chemically diverse compound libraries available at St. Jude Children's Research Hospital. We screened a total of 521133 compounds to discover novel small-molecule modulators of PanK activity using a luciferase-based method we previously reported. NoneThe screened compound library contained 504956 small molecules and 16177 natural products acquired from various commercial sources and collaborators or synthesized at St. Jude. The PanK3 isoform was selected to conduct the HTS because it has a wide tissue distribution in mammals and can be purified in large amounts. All PanK isoforms have homologous catalytic domains, and so we expected that the PanK3 modulators would act against other PanK isoforms in a similar fashion. All compounds were screened at 12 muM concentration in the PanK3 HTS assay, and the data was analyzed in both activator and inhibitor modes (Figure1). The assay provided averagedZ' value of greater than 0.7 for activators and greater than 0.5 for inhibitors, demonstrating the robustness and quality of our assay (Figure1A,D). The discriminatory power of the primary screen was assessed using receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysisNoneusing 448 representative compounds. True positives were defined as any compound yielding a well-behaved, saturating sigmoidal curve in the dose-response assay as determined by fit statistics such asr2and visual inspection. ROC analyses indicated excellent discriminatory power (AUC greater than =0.9 for both assays) and suggested that a cutoff of greater than =40% for activators and greater than =50% for inhibitors would retain greater than =80% of true positives (Figure1C,F). On the basis of this ROC analysis, we classified 9687 compounds (2415 activators and 7272 inhibitors) as "actives" for further analysis. These active compounds were then subjected to dose response analysis for PanK1beta, PanK3, luciferase interference, and cytotoxicity assays (seeSupporting Information). The dose response analysis showed that the compounds identified as PanK3 modulators similarly modulated PanK1beta activity. This result was consistent with the high similarity shared by the two proteins. NoneHTS of 521133 compounds from the St. Jude compound library against PanK3 and ROC analysis of actives. (A)Z' factor in activator mode. (B) Scatter plot of percentage activity of each well from 1642 384-well plates analyzed in activator mode [green, the positive control for the activator screen consisted of a reaction mixture lacking ATP; red, negative control (DMSO vehicle with complete assay components); blue, compound with activity above cutoff; black, compounds with activity below cutoff. Note:Y-axis is normalized % activity, not raw count.]. (C) ROC analysis of activators showing true (yaxis) versus false (xaxis) positive rates of percentage compound activity. Light-gray curves represent bootstrap simulation curves. (D)Z' factor in inhibitor mode. (E) Scatter plot of percentage activity of each well analyzed in inhibitor mode [green, the positive control for the inhibitor screen contained 60 muM acetyl-CoA; red, negative control (DMSO vehicle with complete assay components); blue, compound with activity above cutoff; black, compounds with activity below cutoff. Note:Y-axis is normalized % activity, not raw count.]. (F) ROC analysis of inhibitors. The most promising 100 activators and 100 inhibitors were selected based on their potency, curve filter, Hill number, absence of cytotoxicity, and luciferase interference activity. These compounds were then clustered together based on their structural similarities. To ensure the synthetic tractability of the compounds, a similarity search on each of the scaffolds was performed against the initial "actives" to generate preliminary structure-activity relationships (SAR) and deprioritize singleton hits. Representative compounds of each cluster are shown in Figure2, and the details of their dose response analysis are provided inSupporting Information, Tables S1 and S2. Structures of representative compounds with different chemical scaffolds characterized as (A) activators (1-4) and (B) inhibitors (5-8) as identified from the HTS. EC50and IC50values (muM) represent the activity of the compounds for PanK3 (seeSupporting Information, Tables S1 and S2, for detail dose response analysis). Reagents and conditions: (a) EtOH, hydrazine (5 equiv), 30 min, 160 degrees C, MW, 74%; (b) EtOH, methyl 4-acetyl-5-oxohexanoate (1.5 equiv), 15 min, 80 degrees C, MW, 79%; (c) THF, NaOH, 2 h, rt, 99%; (d) DMF, 3-(methylthio)aniline (1.2 equiv), HBTU (1.3 equiv), Et3N (1.5 equiv), 4 h, rt, 41%. Several compounds with a core tricyclic scaffold (represented by compound7) were in the curated actives list of inhibitors. Thus, we focused our efforts on the synthesis of compounds with the tricyclic scaffold to characterize an active compound from the HTS inhibitor list and to generate preliminary structure-activity relationships (SAR) for development of more advanced lead compounds. The synthesis of tricyclic compounds is depicted in Scheme1. Our synthetic efforts began with a microwave assisted reaction between 2-chloronicotinonitrile (9) with hydrazine. NoneThe reaction yielded10, which was then reacted with methyl 4-acetyl-5-oxohexanoate to obtain tricyclic12. NoneThe hydrolysis of methyl ester12followed by its coupling with 3-(methylthio)aniline provided the required compound7. The activity of7was determined for each of the principle PanK isoforms using a radiochemical enzyme assay (Figure3). NoneThe IC50calculated for compound7was 25 nM for PanK3, whereas the IC50s for PanK1beta and PanK2 were 70 and 92 nM, respectively. These results confirmed the dose-response analysis using the HTS assay showing that compound7inhibited each of the PANK isoforms at about the same level. Although the radiochemical and HTS PanK assays were robust and reproducible, the HTS assay (Table1) consistently yielded higher IC50values than the radiochemical assay (Figure3). The key difference between the two assays was the ATP concentration. The HTS assay employed 100 muM ATP, whereas the radiochemical assay used 2.5 mM ATP. Compound7appeared more potent in the radiochemical assay because the PanK was saturated with ATP4, and the inhibitor binds to the ATP-enzyme intermediate (see below). Inhibition of three PanK isoforms by compound7. These experiments were typical for the IC50determinations in this study. Compound7was equally effective against all three PanK isoforms. IC50(PanK1beta = 70 +/- 1.1 nM, PanK2 = 92 +/- 2.0 nM, and PanK3 = 25 +/- 1.8 nM). Ten points dose response curve in triplicate (SD are provided inSupporting Information). Calculated using ChemBioDraw Ultra. LipE is calculated as LipE = pIC50(PanK3)- ClogP. Next, we designed and synthesized several analogues of7to generate structure-activity relationship (SAR). Using the same approach as described for the synthesis of7, compounds14-33, having diversification on the right-hand side of the molecule (R1), were synthesized through intermediate13. Table1illustrates the activity of these compounds against PanK1beta and PanK3. Removal of the substituent on the aromatic ring (compound15) resulted in decreased activity, indicating its importance. Interestingly, when we moved the -SMe substituent frommeta- topara-position, the activity of the compound (14) was reduced by 30-fold. Replacing the aromatic ring with a cyclohexane ring in compound17decreased the activity against PanK1beta and abrogated the activity against PanK3. Insertion of an additional methylene group between the amino moiety and the phenyl group gives rise to benzylamino derivatives, which exhibited either a complete or a significant loss of potency (compare compounds22and25;27and30;26and29). Compound16, where the amino group of the anilino moiety is methylated, was completely inactive against PanK1beta and PanK3 (compared to15), demonstrating the necessity of having a hydrogen bond donor at that position. By comparing the relative activities of compounds21,22, and23;26,27, and28;7and14; and19and20suggested that the substitution at themeta-position on the aniline ring was most important for the activity observed. A small set of synthesized compounds (34-42) with the modification on the tricyclic core (R2) did not show any improved activity ( less than 30% inhibition at 10 muM) (Figure4). To evaluate the effect of structural modifications on overall intrinsic potential of the molecule, we used a well-accepted metric: lipophilic ligand efficiency (LipE), which combines both potency and lipophilicity. None-NoneCompared to7, compound33exhibited higher LipE without reducing activity significantly. Modification on the left side of the molecule (R2, tricyclic core). All these modifications resulted in inactive compounds ( less than 30% inhibition at 10 muM). Overall, this SAR analysis shows that the side chain of tricyclic compound7is tolerant to multiple modifications, providing an ample opportunity to expand the series in search of more potent, druglike molecules. Additionally, the higher potency of compound15and23toward PanK1beta compared to PanK3 suggested that further medicinal chemistry efforts might ultimately lead to selective inhibitors of different PanK isoforms. We next investigated the kinetic mechanism of compound7inhibition of PanK3. As shown in Figure5A, compound7lowered both theVmaxandKmfor ATP. The pattern of compound7inhibition with respect to pantothenate was mixed (Figure5B). One interpretation of these data is that compound 7 bound to the ATP-enzyme intermediate. A thermal shift analysis was performed to confirm that compound7bound to the ATP-PanK3 complex (Figure5C). Compound7did not stabilize the protein to thermal denaturation when ATP was absent but increased the protein's thermal stability when added in the presence of 2 mM ATP/Mg2+. The apparent binding constant for compound7in these experiments was 0.3 +/- 0.08 muM. These results clearly demonstrate that compound7binds to the ATP-PanK3 complex. Kinetic mechanism for PanK3 inhibition by7. (A) Analysis of ATP kinetics in the presence of 0 (? ), 0.038 (? ), and 0.128 (?) muM of compound7showing mixed-type inhibition with respect to ATP. (B) Analysis of pantothenate kinetics in the presence of 0 (? ), 0.038 (? ), and 0.128 (?) muM of compound7showing mixed inhibition with respect to pantothenate. (C) Thermal stabilization of PanK3 by compound7in the presence of 2 mM ATP/Mg2+. The ability of compound7to inhibit CoA biosynthesis in cultured C3A cells was evaluated in a metabolic labeling experiment. Compound7caused a dose-dependent decrease in [3H]pantothenate incorporation into CoA (Figure6). There was no effect on cell viability at the concentrations of compound7used in this experiment. These data confirm that compound7acts as a PanK inhibitor in cultured cells by blocking de novo CoA biosynthesis. Inhibition of CoA biosynthesis in C3A cells. C3A cells were labeled with [3H]pantothenate for 24 h in the absence or presence of the indicated concentrations of compound7. The cells were extracted, and the amount of radioactive CoA was determined by binding the extract to DE-81 filters as described under methods. The apparent IC50calculated from this data was 0.9 +/- 0.11 muM. In summary, we conducted a HTS of 521133 compounds and identified novel PanK activators and inhibitors capable of modulating PanK activities and cellular CoA levels. The HTS correctly identifies inhibitors based on a preliminary SAR of tricyclic compound7, and the kinetic experiments show that the inhibitor acts by binding to the ATP-enzyme complex. Improvement of the selectivity, efficacy, and other druglike properties of these PanK modulators will require extensive medicinal chemistry efforts which are beyond the scope of this work. Our future endeavors will include the further optimization of identified scaffolds which may lead to a druggable agent capable of selectively modulating PanK activity in vivo. Additional scaffolds from HTS data will be identified and developed. Indeed, the development of modulators of PanK activity could represent a promising approach to the treatment of PKAN and diabetes. The methods are reported in theSupporting Information.