The prevalence of vascular cognitive impairment and vascular dementia, which can be summarized as vascular cognitive disorder (1), is increasing in the elderly (2). Diagnosing vascular cognitive disorder remains challenging, and up to 44% of patients have coincident vascular and Alzheimer disease pathologic processes (3). New diagnostic criteria have been proposed to classify the disease as being probable or possible vascular cognitive disorder (4). To date, no useful imaging biomarkers have been identified for vascular cognitive disorder, and exclusion of amyloid pathologic abnormalities by using positron emission tomographic (PET) imaging (5) or cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers (6) cannot be used in clinical practice, as these techniques are prohibitively expensive and moderately invasive. There is a need for imaging biomarkers that can be used to predict and track vascular cognitive disorder. Moreover, neuroimaging markers may afford mechanistic insights into the key processes that underlie vascular cognitive disorder. Several imaging studies yielded only a modest association between visible ischemic lesion burden and cognitive impairment, which is thought to be an underestimation of the effect of ischemia on cognition, as measurement of lesion burden fails to take ultrastructural tissue damage into account (7,8). Although the initial ischemic damage is focal, there is recognition of structural and functional alteration of distant brain regions due to the remote effects of lesions mainly reflecting Wallerian and transsynaptic degeneration (9). White matter ultrastructural damage can be quantified with diffusion-tensor imaging (DTINone), which allows the study of interrelations between the full extent of vascular tissue damage beyond visible lesions and cognitive impairment. TwoDTINonemetrics, fractional anisotropy (FANone) and mean diffusivity, were shown to be correlated with myelin content and axonal loss (10). Furthermore,FANoneand mean diffusivity maps can be subjected to whole-brain voxel-based or tract-based analysis to overcome the recognized limitations of region of interest analysis (11). diffusion-tensor imagingdiffusion-tensor imagingfractional anisotropyfractional anisotropyPatients with symptomatic carotid artery disease (CADNone) have an increased risk of developing vascular cognitive disorder (12) as a result of several mechanisms, including direct risks of emboli and hypoperfusion via shared risk factors, brain tissue injury resulting from small-vessel disease, and arterial stiffness (4), in addition to being prone to age-related neurodegeneration. Elderly patients with symptomaticCADNoneare thus a particularly interesting group in which to assess the value of neuroimaging markers because of their heightened risk for multiple mechanisms. carotid artery diseasecarotid artery diseaseWe aimed to investigate the role of vascular tissue damage for global cognition and fluency, as this domain is believed to be impaired early in vascular cognitive disorder (13). We hypothesized that strategic lesion location and tissue damage severity are better indexes of vascular cognitive disorder than is lesion volume. To explore the role of putative commixed pathologic processes in our elderly cohort, we assessed whether imaging and cognitive associations were similar in the subgroup of patients at low risk for preclinical Alzheimer disease-namely, those without medial temporal lobe atrophy (MTANone). Second, we examined whether presence ofMTANoneaffected the vascular lesion load and nonlesional tissue damage and used a multivariate prediction model of cognitive disorder to assess the independent contributions of vascular damage andMTANone. medial temporal lobe atrophymedial temporal lobe atrophymedial temporal lobe atrophyThe study protocol was approved by the ethics committee, and all participants gave written informed consent to undergo brain magnetic resonance (MR) imaging and the Addenbrooke's Cognitive Examination-Revised (ACE-RNone). Participants were recruited from aCADNoneimaging study that will be reported elsewhere. From 2010 to 2015, subjects were recruited for theCADNoneimaging study (by A.A.H. and R.J.S.) if they experienced a recent nondisabling cerebrovascular event (stroke, transient ischemic attack, or amaurosis fugax) and were found to have ipsilateral carotid arterial stenosis of more than 30%. Exclusion criteria were contraindications to MR imaging, language or sensory difficulties that would interfere with cognitive assessment, and pre-existing cognitive impairment with possible causes other than vascular events. Research investigators (A.A.H. and R.J.S.) reviewed the clinical notes, spoke to all participants, and excluded(a)patients without the capacity to consent and(b)those with clinically apparent or documented dementia before enrollment. Addenbrooke's Cognitive Examination-Revisedcarotid artery diseasecarotid artery diseaseOne hundred forty-sevenCADNoneimaging study participants agreed to undergo cognitive assessments by using theACE-RNone(14), which was conducted by trained researchers (A.A.H., R.J.S.) on the day of MR imaging. Participants were categorized as being cognitively intact or impaired on the basis of a cutoff value of 82, according to proven good sensitivity and specificity for defining cognitive impairment (14). Normal daily functioning could be normal or mildly impaired, independent of the presence of motor and/or sensory symptoms. carotid artery diseaseAddenbrooke's Cognitive Examination-RevisedIn the cognitively impaired subgroup, we further excluded subjects in whom a nonvascular cause of cognitive disorder was considered clinically. According to published diagnostic criteria (4), the following criteria for probable vascular cognitive disorder had to be met:(a)cognitive impairment (defined in our study asACE-RNonescore less than 82),(b)imaging evidence of cerebrovascular disease (defined in our study as a chronic or acute ischemic lesion at fluid-attenuated inversion-recovery [FLAIRNone] imaging or diffusion-weighted imaging),(c)clear temporal relationship between cerebrovascular disease and cognitive impairment,(d)no evidence of another neurodegenerative disorder that may affect cognition before the onset of cerebrovascular disease, and(e)no history of gradually progressive cognitive impairment before or after manifestation of the cerebrovascular disease. Criteriab-ewere assessed clinically (by A.A.H., with 9 years of clinical experience). Addenbrooke's Cognitive Examination-Revisedfluid-attenuated inversion recoveryAll MR images were acquired with a 3.0-T imaging unit (Achieva; Philips Medical Systems, Best, the Netherlands). The imaging protocol included axialDTINone(spin-echo single-shot diffusion-weighted echo-planar imaging with abvalue [gradient factor] of 1000 sec/mm2, 15 directions, one volume with abvalue of 0 sec/mm2acquired, repetition time [sec]/echo time [msec] of 4.2/57, field of view of 224 * 224, matrix of 112 * 112, and 45 sections of 3-mm thickness acquired), axialFLAIRNoneimaging (repetition time [sec]/echo time [sec] of 10.5/0.14; inversion time, 2.75 seconds; field of view, 224 * 192; matrix, 224 * 181; and 45 sections of 3-mm thickness acquired), and a plaque hemorrhage-sensitive, blood-nulled, water-selective T1-weighted three-dimensional gradient-echo sequence (repetition time msec/echo time msec, 8.8/4.11; inversion time, 570 msec; field of view, 92 * 162; matrix, 384 * 384; and 102 sections of 0.9-mm thickness acquired, covering the hippocampal formation fully in 50 cases). diffusion-tensor imagingfluid-attenuated inversion recoveryPreprocessing ofDTINonedata sets and computation ofFANoneand mean diffusivity maps were performed by using the diffusion toolbox of FSL (Oxford Centre for Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging of the Brain [FMRIB] Software Library, Oxford, England) (15). Isotropic maximum diffusion images with abvalue of 1000 sec/mm2extracted fromDTINoneimages and mean diffusivity maps were used to outline acute ischemic lesions. diffusion-tensor imagingfractional anisotropydiffusion-tensor imagingMTANonewas rated per subject on reconstructed coronalFLAIRNoneimages by using the Scheltens scale (16) (D.M., with 6 years of neuroimaging training; and Q.S., a neurology trainee with a master of science in translational neuroimaging; supervised by D.P.A., with more than 25 years of quantitative neuroimaging research experience). Visual rating for all subjects was performed twice to study intrarater reliability. To validate the reliability of using reconstructedFLAIRNoneimages to assessMTANone, the Scheltens scale was also applied to all subjects who had coronal T1-weighted images sufficiently covering the hippocampal formation (n= 50, D.M.). Assessments were performed while blinded to the patients' age and clinical information. Presence ofMTANonewas defined by using the following age range-specific cutoffs for the meanMTANonescores (the averaged value of both hemispheres):MTANoneof more than 1.5 in patients younger than 75 years of age,MTANoneof more than 2 in patients at least 75 years of age, andMTANoneof more than 2.5 in patients at least 85 years of age (17). To validate the reliability ofMTANoneassessment, intermodality agreement (n= 50), interrater agreement (n= 108), and intrarater agreement (n= 108) were analyzed. Patients were further classified into two subgroups according to theirMTANonescore: those withMTANoneand those without. Patients withoutMTANonewho have clinically probable vascular cognitive disorder can be considered to have a low risk of having comorbid Alzheimer disease (18). medial temporal lobe atrophyfluid-attenuated inversion recoveryfluid-attenuated inversion recoverymedial temporal lobe atrophymedial temporal lobe atrophymedial temporal lobe atrophymedial temporal lobe atrophymedial temporal lobe atrophymedial temporal lobe atrophymedial temporal lobe atrophymedial temporal lobe atrophymedial temporal lobe atrophymedial temporal lobe atrophyFLAIRNoneand diffusion images were registered into Montreal Neurological Institute (MNINone) template space by using FSL tools (19). Lacunar infarctions, acute ischemic infarctions, chronic subcortical ischemic lesions, and cortical infarctions were separately and manually outlined (by D.M., a trained investigator) on coregistered images by using locally developed NeuRoi software(None). Lacunar infarctions were defined as small ( less than 20-mm) hypointense subcortical areas onFLAIRNoneimages. Hyperintense lesions on images acquired with abvalue of 1000 sec/mm2that were hypointense on mean diffusivity maps were considered acute ischemic infarctions. SubcorticalFLAIRNonehyperintense lesions were considered to reflect chronic subcortical ischemic lesions, and corticalFLAIRNonehypointensities were considered to reflect chronic cortical infarctions. Then, three kinds of lesion maps were generated:(a)an "infarction frequency map" included acute ischemic infarctions and chronic cortical and lacunar infarctions,(b)a "chronic subcortical ischemia frequency map" was generated by adding chronic subcortical ischemic lesions, and(c)a "total ischemic lesion frequency map" was created by combining both maps. fluid-attenuated inversion recoveryMontreal Neurological Institutefluid-attenuated inversion recoveryfluid-attenuated inversion recoveryfluid-attenuated inversion recoveryLesion type-specific volumes were calculated by using NeuRoi software. FLAIRNonebrain images without skull, extracted by using the "Brain Extraction Tool" of the Oxford Centre for Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging of the Brain (20), were loaded into NeuRoi for calculating total brain volumes. Lesion volumes were divided by total brain volumes for normalization. The total ischemic lesion load was calculated by adding the normalized volumes of nonoverlapping acute and chronic lesions and was logarithmically expressed to account for nonnormal distribution. fluid-attenuated inversion recoverySince results of a previous study demonstrated the strategic role of lacunar infarctions located at the hippocampus, thalamus, mesial temporal areas, basal forebrain, and frontocingular cortex in vascular dementia (21), the frequency of infarctions at these locations was recorded. Voxel-based lesion-symptom mapping (VLSMNone)(None)was used to determine lesion locations associated with cognition and fluency (22). All analyses were controlled for age and total ischemic lesion load (logarithmically expressed). Additionally, performance of memory, language, attention, and visuospatial ability derived fromACE-RNonewas controlled for when assessing the association between lesion locations and fluency. Significant voxels were projected onto the 1 * 1 * 1-mmMNINonetemplate, and major white matter tracts (WMTNones) that contained significant clusters were identified from theWMTNoneatlas within FSL (23). voxel-based lesion-symptom mappingAddenbrooke's Cognitive Examination-RevisedMontreal Neurological Institutewhite matter tractwhite matter tractWhole white matter ultrastructural damage and its association with global cognition and fluency were investigated by means of tract-based spatial statistics (TBSSNone) onFANoneand mean diffusivity maps. The standardTBSSNoneprocedure was applied to this study (24). tract-based spatial statisticsfractional anisotropytract-based spatial statisticsMean diffusivity values were derived from each individual's maps of chronic subcortical ischemic lesions, normal-appearing white matter (NAWMNone), andWMTNoneskeleton to investigate tissue-specific injury. Infarction severity was not studied owing to the mixed type of infarctions, which may confound the assessment of severity of tissue damage. normal-appearing white matterwhite matter tractTo confirm whether the imaging-cognitive associations were independent of potentially comorbid but preclinical Alzheimer disease pathologic processes, as indexed by the presence of hippocampal atrophy, we repeated all imaging analysis in the subgroup of patients withoutMTANone. medial temporal lobe atrophyThe spatial distribution of two kinds of lesion maps was compared on a voxel-by-voxel basis by using a Fisher test (with the false discovery rate controlled at 0.05) as implemented in the NeuRoi software package(None). Reliability and agreement analysis.-The inter- and intrarater reliability and the agreement ofMTANonemeasurement on reconstructedFLAIRNoneimages with that on coronal three-dimensional T1-weighted gradient-echo images were assessed by using the Cohen kappa coefficient. medial temporal lobe atrophyfluid-attenuated inversion recoveryNoneNoneanalysis.-Nonparametric mapping was used to relate lesion location and cognitive performance (ttest). Voxels affected in fewer than four subjects (the default setting inVLSMNone) were not considered for analysis. False discovery rate was used to correct for multiple comparisons. voxel-based lesion-symptom mappingvoxel-based lesion-symptom mappingNoneNoneanalysis.-The voxelwise statistical analysis of theDTINonedata was based on a nonparametric method by using a permutation test (n= 5000) with a general linear-model design matrix (25). tract-based spatial statisticsdiffusion-tensor imagingTissue damage severity.-The age-independent interrelations between severity of tissue damage and cognition were assessed by using SPSS version 21 software (SPSS, Chicago, Ill). The correlation coefficients were compared by using VassarStats software(None). Prediction models.-Univariate regression analysis was first performed to initially explore the predictive value of age and various imaging markers, including normalized volumes of lacunar infarctions, acute and chronic ischemic lesions, mean diffusivity values of infarctions, chronic subcortical ischemic lesions,NAWMNoneandWMTNoneskeleton, andMTANonefor cognitive status. Given the number of cognitively impaired subjects (n= 53), five factors were selected for creating the multivariate prediction model. normal-appearing white matterwhite matter tractmedial temporal lobe atrophyThe area under the receiver operating characteristic curve for the diagnosis of probable vascular cognitive disorder was constructed by using SPSS software for the imaging metrics selected from the prediction model. APvalue less than .05 was considered to indicate a significant difference for all analyses. Of the 147 participants, 38 had to be excluded owing to incomplete MR examination or poor quality of MR images as assessed visually, and one subject was excluded because of comorbid Parkinson disease that likely contributed to cognitive impairment. This resulted in a cohort of 108 subjects. Fifty-three patients (49.1%) were cognitively impaired and were classified as having probable vascular cognitive disorder. Forty-eight of these had experienced first-ever stroke without any known cognitive impairment or other relevant background. Four subjects had a previous history of poststroke cognitive impairment with subsequent partial improvement, and one subject later developed cerebral hemorrhage, which was considered to be amyloid angiopathy. Patients with abnormal cognition were older (P= .027), had a higher percentage of smokers (P= .015), and had more peripheral vascular disease (P= .017) than those with normal cognition (n= 55, 50.9%). Of the 108 subjects, 98 subjects (90.7%) were not at risk for cerebral hemodynamic impairment due to carotid stenosis of less than 80% on either side or both sides (Table 1). Among 10 subjects who had carotid stenosis of more than 80% on either side, three subjects had bilaterial carotid stenosis of more than 80%. Demographics, MR Imaging Characteristics, and Cognitive Profile of the Study Cohort and Comparison between Cognitive SubgroupsNote.-Numbers in parentheses are percentages. *Data are means +/- standard deviations. NoneStatistically significant (P less than .05). NoneThreshold for possible hemodynamic impairment greater than 80%-that is, subgroup of greater than 70%. Pvalue refers to greater than 80% vs rest. MTANonescores showed high inter- and intrarater reliability and similarly good agreement between assessment onFLAIRNoneimages and coronal T1-weighted images (Appendix E1[online]). Twenty-three subjects (21.3%) hadMTANone, while 85 subjects (78.7%) did not. Most subjects withMTANonewere cognitively impaired (n= 20, 87.0%), compared with 33 (38.8%) of those withoutMTANone(P less than .001). medial temporal lobe atrophyfluid-attenuated inversion recoverymedial temporal lobe atrophymedial temporal lobe atrophymedial temporal lobe atrophyCognitively impaired patients had larger normalized acute lesion volumes (mean +/- standard deviation, [5.9 +/- 11.3] * 10-4for cognitively impaired patients vs [2.7 +/- 5.1] * 10-4for cognitively intact patients;P= .028), higher chronic subcortical ischemic volumes ([15.5 +/- 15.5] * 10-3for cognitively impaired patients vs [8.0 +/- 10.5] * 10-3for cognitively intact patients,P= .009), and more cortical infarctions (n= 4 [3.7%] cognitively impaired patients;n= 0 [0%] cognitively intact patients;P= .016) after controlling for age (Table 2). Similar group differences were found in the subgroup withoutMTANone(Table E1[online]). medial temporal lobe atrophyLesion Volumes,MTANone, and Cognitionmedial temporal lobe atrophyNote.-Numbers in parentheses are percentages. *Pvalue for the comparison between cognitively impaired patients withMTANoneand those withoutMTANone, controlled for age. medial temporal lobe atrophymedial temporal lobe atrophyNonePvalue for the comparison between patients with normal cognition and those with abnormal cognition, controlled for age. NonePvalue for the comparison between patients withMTANoneand patients withoutMTANone, controlled for age. medial temporal lobe atrophymedial temporal lobe atrophySPvalue for the correlation between lesion volumes and global cognitive performance, controlled for age. ||Pvalue for the correlation between lesion volumes and fluency, controlled for age. #Data are means +/- standard deviations. **Statistically significant (P less than .05). Three strategic thalamic lacunar infarctions were seen in cognitively impaired patients (5.6%), but none were seen in cognitively intact subjects. Cognitively impaired subjects (n= 53, 49.1%) also showed qualitatively more extended patterns of the infarctions (Fig 1a) and chronic subcortical ischemia frequencies (Fig 1b), but the difference was not significant by using voxel-based analysis (false discovery rate corrected,P greater than .05). Additionally, according to visual inspection, no infarctions or chronic subcortical ischemic lesions were located in the known language brain areas, such as superior and middle temporal gyri, inferior frontal gyri, and insula, which may affect language performance (26). (a)Infarction maps in patients with normal cognition and those with abnormal cognition. Maps were superimposed onto the 1 * 1 * 1-mmMNINone152 standard-space T1-weighted average structural template. The color bars show the variation between the minimum and maximum number of lesions. Z score maps represent the result of group comparison between patients with normal cognition and those with abnormal cognition. The significant voxels (according to results of the Fisher test) did not survive the false discovery rate correction. The color bar of the Z score maps shows the variation in Z score between the minimum and maximum values. (b)Chronic subcortical ischemic lesion frequency maps in patients with normal cognition and those with abnormal cognition. Details are the same as fora. Montreal Neurological Institute(a)Infarction maps in patients with normal cognition and those with abnormal cognition. Maps were superimposed onto the 1 * 1 * 1-mmMNINone152 standard-space T1-weighted average structural template. The color bars show the variation between the minimum and maximum number of lesions. Z score maps represent the result of group comparison between patients with normal cognition and those with abnormal cognition. The significant voxels (according to results of the Fisher test) did not survive the false discovery rate correction. The color bar of the Z score maps shows the variation in Z score between the minimum and maximum values. (b)Chronic subcortical ischemic lesion frequency maps in patients with normal cognition and those with abnormal cognition. Details are the same as fora. Montreal Neurological InstituteVoxelwise group comparisons of mean diffusivity and/orFANonemaps demonstrated widespread mean diffusivity increases andFANonedecreases between patients with abnormal cognition and those with normal cognition (Fig E1[online]). fractional anisotropyfractional anisotropyIn cognitively impaired patients versus normal subjects, mean diffusivity (Table 3) was increased in chronic subcortical ischemic lesions ([1.05 +/- 0.09] * 10-9m2/sec in cognitively impaired patients vs [0.99 +/- 0.11] * 10-9m2/sec in normal patients [P= .007]; partial eta2= 0.068 [95% confidence interval {CINone}: 0.016, 0.095),NAWMNone([0.78 +/- 0.04] * 10-9m2/sec for cognitively impaired patients and [0.75 +/- 0.03] * 10-9m2/sec for normal patients [P= .002]; eta2= 0.086 [95%CINone: 0.008, 0.037]), andWMTNoneskeleton ([0.83 +/- 0.05] * 10-9m2/sec for cognitively impaired patients vs [0.77 +/- 0.03] * 10-9m2/sec for normal patients [P less than .001]; eta2= 0.271 [95%CINone: 0.035, 0.067]). confidence intervalnormal-appearing white matterconfidence intervalwhite matter tractconfidence intervalSeverity of Tissue Damage and Cognitive PerformanceNote.-Data are means +/- standard deviations, unless indicated otherwise. *Pvalue for the comparison between cognitively impaired patients withMTANoneand those withoutMTANone, controlled for age. medial temporal lobe atrophymedial temporal lobe atrophyNonePvalue for the comparison between patients with normal cognition and those with abnormal cognition, controlled for age. NonePvalue for the comparison between patients withMTANoneand patients withoutMTANone, controlled for age. medial temporal lobe atrophymedial temporal lobe atrophySPvalue for the age-independent correlation between mean diffusivity of chronic subcortical ischemic lesions,NAWMNone,WMTNoneskeleton, and global cognitive performance. normal-appearing white matterwhite matter tract||Pvalue for the age-independent correlation between mean diffusivity of chronic subcortical ischemic lesions,NAWMNone,WMTNoneskeleton, and global cognitive performance in subjects withoutMTANone. normal-appearing white matterwhite matter tractmedial temporal lobe atrophy#Statistically significant (P less than .05). In patients withoutMTANone(n= 85), bothNAWMNoneandWMTNoneskeleton mean diffusivity were also significantly higher in cognitively impaired patients versus normal patients (NAWMNone,P= .047 [eta2= 0.047; 95%CINone: 0.001, 0.028];WMTNoneskeleton,P less than .001 [eta2= 0.230; 95%CINone: 0.024, 0.057]) (Table E2[online]). medial temporal lobe atrophynormal-appearing white matterwhite matter tractnormal-appearing white matterconfidence intervalwhite matter tractconfidence intervalNone of the normalized lesion type volumes were significantly correlated with global cognition (lacunar infarctions,P= .060; acute lesions,P= .088; chronic subcortical ischemic lesions,P= .085). In contrast, normalized lacunar infarction volumes (R2= 0.07,P= .005) and chronic subcortical ischemic lesion volumes (R2= 0.07,P= .007) were negatively correlated with fluency performance (Table 2). Interestingly, in patients withoutMTANone, normalized lacunar infarction volumes were correlated with both global cognition (R2= 0.06,P= .030) and fluency (R2= 0.08,P= .007), while normalized acute lesion volumes were correlated with global cognition (R2= 0.06,P= .020) but not fluency (Table E1[online]). medial temporal lobe atrophySignificant correlations were identified between clusters of chronic subcortical ischemia presence and global cognition and fluency (false discovery rate,q= 0.05; threshold,t= 2.4) by usingVLSMNone. A total of 159 and 1351 voxels were identified in which presence of chronic subcortical ischemia was significantly related to impaired global cognition and fluency, respectively. Clusters for global cognition were mainly projected onto the anterior thalamic radiation, forceps minor, and forceps major (Table 4;Fig 2,None). Clusters for fluency were mainly projected onto the anterior thalamic radiation and superior longitudinal fasciculus (Table 4;Fig 2,None). No significant clusters were identified for the infarction frequency maps and global cognition or fluency. Similar results were identified in patients withoutMTANone(n= 85,Fig E2[online]). voxel-based lesion-symptom mappingmedial temporal lobe atrophyMNINoneCoordinates for the Local Maxima of Clusters That Correlate with CognitionMontreal Neurological InstituteA,Maps show the topography of chronic ischemic lesions associated with global cognitive impairment. Significant clusters (red) according toVLSMNoneanalysis (P less than .05, false discovery rate corrected, controlled for age and normalized total ischemic lesion volumes after logarithmic transformation) are projected onto theMNINone152 standard-space T1-weighted average structural template image with overlain selectedWMTNones from the Johns Hopkins University DTI-based white matter atlas (yellow, forceps major; brown, anterior thalamic radiation; blue, forceps minor). B,Maps show the topography of chronic ischemic lesions associated with impaired fluency. Details are the same as forA(green, superior longitudinal fasciculus). L= left,R= right. voxel-based lesion-symptom mappingMontreal Neurological Institutewhite matter tractAge-independent correlation betweenWMTNonemean diffusivity and global cognition was widespread on the basis ofTBSSNone(Table 4;Fig 3,None). A similar correlation pattern was identified between fluency and mean diffusivity of widespread white matter except forceps major and right inferior longitudinal fasciculus (Table 4;Fig 3,None). The analyses of correlation betweenFANoneand global cognition yielded similar results (Fig E3[online]). No significant correlation was identified betweenFANoneand fluency. The pattern of widespreadWMTNonedamage associated with impaired cognition in the subgroup of patients withoutMTANonewas similar to that in the whole study cohort (Fig E4[online]). We found a consistent, indirect interrelation between tissue-specific mean diffusivity and cognitive performance after controlling for age (chronic subcortical ischemic lesions,R2= 0.090 [P= .002];NAWMNone,R2= 0.074 [P= .005];WMTNoneskeleton,R2= 0.311 [P less than .001]) (Table 3,Fig 4). Similar interrelations were also identified in patients withoutMTANone(n= 85) (Table E2[online]). Also, the partial correlation between global cognition andWMTNoneskeleton mean diffusivity was significantly stronger than that between global cognition and chronic subcortical ischemic lesion mean diffusivity (P= .018) orNAWMNonemean diffusivity (P= .004). white matter tracttract-based spatial statisticsfractional anisotropyfractional anisotropywhite matter tractmedial temporal lobe atrophynormal-appearing white matterwhite matter tractmedial temporal lobe atrophywhite matter tractnormal-appearing white matterA,Maps showWMTNonemean diffusivity and global cognition. SignificantTBSSNoneresults show skeletal voxels (red) where increased mean diffusivity correlated with global cognitive decline (controlled for age and normalized total ischemic lesion volumes after logarithmic transformation,P less than .05, corrected). MeanTBSSNonetract skeleton (green) and total ischemic lesion distribution map (yellow) were overlaid on theMNINone152 standard-space T1-weighted average structural template image. B,Maps showWMTNonemean diffusivity and fluency. Details are the same as forA. L= left,R= right. white matter tracttract-based spatial statisticstract-based spatial statisticsMontreal Neurological Institutewhite matter tractScatterplots show the correlation between mean diffusivity(MD)within chronic subcortical ischemic lesions,NAWMNone,WMTNoneskeleton, and global cognitive performance, corrected for age. normal-appearing white matterwhite matter tractOn the basis of univariate regression analyses, normalized volume of chronic subcortical ischemic lesions (P= .007), mean diffusivity of chronic subcortical ischemic lesions (P= .004),NAWMNone(P= .001),WMTNoneskeleton (P less than .001), andMTANone(P less than .001) were found to be predictors of cognitive status. After entering these factors into the multivariate prediction model,WMTNoneskeleton mean diffusivity (P= .001, exp[beta] = 38.880 [95%CINone: 4.207, 359.336]) andMTANonescore (P= .015, exp[beta] = 6.074 [95%CINone: 1.426, 25.867]) remained as the only independent significant factors (Table E3[online]). normal-appearing white matterwhite matter tractmedial temporal lobe atrophywhite matter tractconfidence intervalmedial temporal lobe atrophyconfidence intervalThe receiver operating characteristic curves ofWMTNoneskeleton mean diffusivity andMTANonescore for the diagnosis of cognitive deficits were constructed separately (Fig 5), with an area under the receiver operating characteristic curve of 0.82 (95%CINone: 0.75, 0.90) forWMTNoneskeleton mean diffusivity and an area under the curve of 0.66 (95%CINone: 0.56, 0.77) forMTANonescore. At a mean diffusivity cutoff value of 0.797 * 10-9m2/sec, sensitivity and specificity were 77.4% and 72.7%, respectively. At a cutoff value of 0.75 for meanMTANonescore, sensitivity was 72.2%, and specificity was 55.5%. white matter tractmedial temporal lobe atrophyconfidence intervalwhite matter tractconfidence intervalmedial temporal lobe atrophymedial temporal lobe atrophyReceiver operating characteristic curves with a diagonal reference line (red) for prediction of global cognitive performance according toWMTNoneskeleton mean diffusivity (MD,green) andMTANonescore (blue). white matter tractmedial temporal lobe atrophyIn this multimodal MR imaging study in 108 patients with advanced arteriosclerosis and a recent cerebrovascular event, we found that the location of chronic subcortical ischemic lesions in the anterior thalamic radiation and interhemispheric fiber tracts and the severity ofWMTNonedamage, indexed according to mean diffusivity increase, were associated with cognitive impairment. These results suggest that subcortical disconnection of large-scale cognitive neural networks that result from strategic and cumulative lesional and nonlesional tract damage play a key role in cognitive impairment in advanced arteriosclerosis. white matter tractOur findings confirm and extend the strategic role of anterior thalamic radiation and interhemispheric fiber damages as a mechanism of cognitive impairment, as previously shown in small-vessel disease (27) and in manifest vascular disease due to arteriosclerosis anywhere (28). The identification of anterior thalamic radiation and superior longitudinal fasciculus as strategicWMTNones for fluency in our study also closely replicates results in manifest vascular disease (28). The consistency of findings across different patient cohorts highlights that lesion location rather than disease origin determines cognitive outcomes. This in turn is concordant with our current understanding that disconnection of large-scale cognitive networks through the anterior thalamic radiation and the forceps minor underlies vascular cognitive disorder in both small- and large-artery disease. In contrast to previous studies in vascular disease, we found a key role of the forceps major in global cognition (27,28). This partial discrepancy could be due to the differences in the underlying vasculopathy but is more likely due to variation in cognitive assessments. In previous studies, investigators focused on processing speed or executive function, which mainly reflect frontal lobe dysfunctions (27,28). Forceps major integrity, on the other hand, has been related to memory, attention, and executive functions (29). Interestingly, the global cognitive role of the forceps major in nonvascular brain diseases, such as multiple sclerosis (30,31), suggests that consistent structural-cognitive interrelations exist in disconnection disorders across different diseases. white matter tractThe observed widespread age-independent associations between ultrastructural white matter damage and global cognition, as well as fluency, agree well with the results of previous studies in patients with subcortical vascular dementia (32), cerebral autosomal-dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy (33), and mild cognitive impairment (34). Diffusional changes are thought to reflect primary or secondary tissue damage, including Wallerian degeneration with myelin damage, axonal loss, gliosis, and incomplete ischemia (35,36). We thus consider that the observedWMTNoneultrastructural damage reflects cumulative focal and remote effects of vascular tissue damage, thereby providing a more reliable index of cerebrovascular lesion burden than lesions visible on MR images do. This is corroborated by the finding that lesion volumes played no role or only a minor role in explaining global cognitive and fluency performance, which is well in line with previous reports (7,36). Taken together, topographic, volumetric, and diffusivity findings converge and point to a key role of subcortical disconnection within large-scale cognitive neural networks that may underpin vascular cognitive disorder. white matter tractIt is noteworthy that cognitively impaired subjects withMTANoneshowed more extensive ultrastructural white matter damage than those withoutMTANone, even after age correction (Table 3). While speculative, this association would be consistent with the notion of supra-additive cognitive effects of vascular and neurodegenerative pathologic processes (37,38) that may further contribute to the recognized increasing prevalence of mixed pathologic findings in the elderly (3). Future research is needed to confirm and further characterize such interactions and putative responsiveness to therapeutic interventions. This will be facilitated by the combined use of two simple imaging measures from standard brain MR imaging examinations:MTANoneas an established marker of hippocampal pathologic abnormalities andWMTNoneskeleton mean diffusivity, which we propose as a new, promising marker of subcortical disconnection. WMTNoneskeleton mean diffusivity also has potential as an imaging biomarker of vascular cognitive disorder (area under the receiver operating characteristic curve, 0.82; sensitivity, 77.4%; specificity, 72.7%). The lower specificity compared with cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers (sensitivity, 68%; specificity, 87%) (39) could be explained by the milder end of the cognitive deficit profile in our study. medial temporal lobe atrophymedial temporal lobe atrophymedial temporal lobe atrophywhite matter tractwhite matter tractThe main limitations of our study are a lack of neuropsychometric information on premorbid cognition due to the study design and a lack of direct diagnostic tools for amyloid pathologic abnormalities. We are, however, confident that we excluded patients with premorbid dementia, as a research investigator with up to 9 years of clinical experiences (A.A.H.) spoke to all participants and carefully reviewed clinical notes to exclude patients without the capacity to consent and those with clinically apparent dementia before MR imaging examination. Also, on the basis of the clinical information and the published diagnostic criteria, all 53 cognitively impaired subjects in our cohort were considered to have probable vascular cognitive disorder. Nevertheless, we cannot exclude premorbid Alzheimer disease, with an expected prevalence of 11%-20% in those aged 65 and older (40,41). In the absence of amyloid PET data, we used the indirect marker ofMTANonewith proven high positive and negative predictive value for Alzheimer disease (17,18). We found that just over 21% of our cohort showedMTANone. Importantly, all main findings reported in the whole study group were confirmed in the subgroup of subjects withoutMTANone, considered to be at low risk of Alzheimer disease. This allows us to largely exclude a confounding effect from undetected Alzheimer disease. Second, we have a variable time interval from the cerebrovascular event to MR imaging. This is, however, unlikely to have biased our results, as we did not observe cognitive associations with acute infarction metrics. Last, in this study, we did not investigate the presence of hemodynamic impairment and hence cannot exclude this as a contributory factor in individual subjects. Nevertheless, only 10 of 108 subjects (9.3%) had more than 80% carotid arterial stenosis, and only a subgroup of these can be expected to show hemodynamic impairment. medial temporal lobe atrophymedial temporal lobe atrophymedial temporal lobe atrophyIn conclusion, we demonstrated that lesional and ultrastructural affection of theWMTNoneskeleton contributes to cognitive impairment in patients with recently symptomaticCADNone, independent of the effect of age, and also in patients withoutMTANone. This supports the notion that subcortical disconnection of cognitive neural networks is a key mechanism of cognitive impairment in patients with probable vascular cognitive disorder. white matter tractcarotid artery diseasemedial temporal lobe atrophy? In patients with carotid artery disease, cerebrovascular lesion location in the thalamic radiation and interhemispheric fiber tracts contributes to global cognitive deficits, and lesions in the thalamic radiation and long association fibers affect fluency performance. ? Severity of subcortical tissue damage, preferentially in major white matter tracts, contributes to global cognitive impairment (R2= 0.311,P less than .001), with skeleton mean diffusivity as the best-performing imaging marker for the prediction of probable vascular cognitive disorder (area under the receiver operating characteristic curve, 0.82 [95% confidence interval: 0.75, 0.90]). ? Findings were confirmed in patients with low risk of comorbid Alzheimer disease (absence of medial temporal lobe atrophy [MTANone]), while presence ofMTANonewas associated with more severe cognitive impairment, increased vascular lesion load, and more severe tissue damage. medial temporal lobe atrophymedial temporal lobe atrophy? Disconnection of large-scale cognitive neural networks from cumulative lesional and nonlesional tract injuries is proposed as a mechanism of cognitive impairment in advanced arteriosclerosis. ? The findings provide insights into how cerebrovascular disease contributes to cognitive impairment and/or dementia and highlight the need to combat progressive subcortical brain tissue damage; average white matter skeleton mean diffusivity shows potential as a simple diagnostic marker of subcortical disconnection underlying vascular cognitive disorder.