Glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1) is a gut-secreted peptide that augments glucose-dependent insulin secretion via a pancreatic GLP-1 receptor (GLP-1R) (1). Long-acting GLP-1R agonists (GLP-1RA) are used for treating type 2 diabetes (2). GLP-1RA also reduce food intake and body weight primarily by targeting the central nervous system (CNS) (3). Intracerebroventricular (ICV) injection of GLP-1RA reduce food intake (4-8) and body weight (9) in rodents. Furthermore, CNS deletion of theGlp1rattenuates the anorectic effect of the GLP-1RA liraglutide (3). Hypothalamic GLP-1R signaling has received particular attention as this region regulates energy balance as well as glucose and lipid metabolism (10,11). Peripheral administration of GLP-1RA stimulates hypothalamic neuronal activity (7,12,13). Injection of GLP-1RA to hypothalamic nuclei suppresses feeding in rats (5,14-16), and recent evidence suggests that the arcuate nucleus (ARC) mediates the anorectic effects of liraglutide (17). Furthermore, targeting liraglutide to the ventromedial hypothalamic (VMH) nucleus stimulates brown adipose tissue thermogenesis and adipocyte browning, suggesting that hypothalamic GLP-1R signaling also controls body weight via regulation of energy expenditure (EE) in rodents (15). The studies described above primarily entailed pharmacological activation of the GLP-1R. Although this demonstrates that the hypothalamic GLP-1R is sufficient to modulate energy balance, it does not address whether it is necessary for the effects of endogenous GLP-1 or clinically utilized GLP-1RA on phenotypes associated with energy balance. ICV delivery of the GLP-1R antagonist exendin (9-39) (Ex9) stimulates food intake in fed rats and blocks the anorectic effects of peripherally administered GLP-1RA, suggesting that the CNS GLP-1R is necessary for the feeding effects of endogenous and exogenous GLP-1RA (7,18). However, this does not identify the specific CNS regions that mediate the satiety effects of GLP-1 or therapeutic GLP-1RA. Furthermore, acute pharmacological approaches do not assess the long-term, day-to-day regulation of energy balance by the CNS GLP-1R. To address this, we generated mice lacking hypothalamicGlp1rexpression by crossing mice expressing floxedGlp1ralleles with Nkx2.1-Cre mice. Nkx2.1-Cre mice exhibit Cre expression throughout the hypothalamus including in the ARC, paraventricular (PVN), VMH, dorsomedial (DMH), and lateral (LH) nuclei (19). As the PVN and ARC have been identified as GLP-1RA-responsive hypothalamic nuclei (14,17), we also generated mice lackingGlp1rexpression specifically in the PVN and in proopiomelanocortin (POMC) neurons (ARCGlp1rexpression is primarily in POMC neurons [14]) by crossing floxedGlp1rmice with Sim1-Cre and POMC-Cre mice, respectively (20,21). Using these models, we tested the hypothesis that disruption of hypothalamicGlp1rexpression dysregulates energy balance and that the anorectic effects of peripherally administered GLP-1RA require the hypothalamic GLP-1R. As pharmacological studies suggest a role for the hypothalamic GLP-1R in the maintenance of glucose homeostasis (14), we also tested the hypothesis that disruption of hypothalamicGlp1rexpression impairs glucose tolerance. We demonstrate that knockdown of the hypothalamicGlp1rhas no overall effects on net energy balance, glucose homeostasis, or the response to peripherally administered GLP-1RA. These findings highlight the complexity of CNS GLP-1R-mediated signals modulating feeding behavior and glucose handling and indirectly support a role for extrahypothalamic brain regions in GLP-1R-dependent control of energy homeostasis. We generated mouse lines lackingGlp1rexpression in the hypothalamus (GLP-1RKDDeltaNkx2.1cre), PVN (GLP-1RKDDeltaSim1cre), and POMC neurons (GLP-1RKDDeltaPOMCcre) by breeding floxedGlp1rmice (GLP-1Rf/f), generated as described previously (22), with Nk2 homeobox 1 (Nkx2.1)-Cre, single-minded homolog 1 (Sim1)-Cre, and POMC-Cre mice (The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME), respectively (19-21). Experiments were performed in male mice. Chow diet (Harlan Teklad #2016) studies were performed in 3- to 4-month-old animals. Following energy balance assessment, mice were placed on a 60% high-fat diet (HFD) (D12492; Research Diets, New Brunswick, NJ) for 12 weeks, such that HFD-fed studies were performed in 7- to 8-month-old animals. Animals were maintained on a 12:12-h light:dark cycle in facilities at Sanford Burnham Prebys Medical Discovery Institute (SBP) at Lake Nona or the University of Cincinnati (UC). All protocols were approved by the SBP and UC Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees. Cannulae were implanted as previously described (4). Guide cannulae (Plastics One, Roanoke, VA) targeted the PVN (0.7 mm caudal, 0.3 mm from midline, 5.0 mm ventral), ARC (2.3 mm caudal, 1.1 mm from midline, 5.6 mm ventral, 10 degrees angle), or cortex (0.46 mm caudal, 2.0 mm from midline, 1.75 mm ventral). Verification of proper coordinates was made histologically following injection of 1% Evans-Blue dye. Mice recovered for 7 days before experimentation. Glp1rexpression was assessed in GLP-1RKDDeltaNkx2.1cre, GLP-1Rf/f, and whole-body GLP-1R knockout mice (GLP-1RKO) mice by qRT-PCR. Total RNA was extracted from the hypothalamus using a column-based method (Zymo Research, Irvine, CA) and converted to cDNA (High Capacity RNA-to-cDNA kit, Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). Glp1rand ribosomal protein L32 mRNA transcript levels were determined using gene-specific probes in accordance with manufacturer's instructions using a StepOnePlus qPCR instrument (Applied Biosystems). qPCR primers (5'- greater than 3') were as follows:Glp1r, F:GATGCTGCCCTCAAGTGGAT, R:ATGAGCAGGAACACCAGTCG and L32, F:ACATTTGCCCTGAATAGTGGT, R:ATCCTCTTGCCCTGATCCTT. qPCR was also performed in whole-brain homogenates excluding the hypothalamus. Gene expression levels were calculated as relative quantification using the 2-DeltaDeltaCTmethod. Glp1rknockdown in the PVN and ARC of GLP-1RKDDeltaSim1creand GLP-1RKDDeltaPOMCcremice was confirmed by RNA in situ hybridization. Whole brains were harvested, and tissue was formalin-fixed (24-h, 10% neutral buffered formalin) and paraffin-embedded (FFPE) and sectioned using a microtome. Five-micrometer coronal sections were stained with RNAscope probes (Advanced Cell Diagnostics, Newark, CA), according to manufacturer's instructions. Sections were treated with test (Glp1r) and control (positive, peptidylprolyl isomerase B; negative, dihydrodipicolinate reductase) RNA probes using a single-plex chromogenic-RED RNAscope 2.5 assay kit on a Bond RX automated in situ hybridization slide staining system (Leica Biosystems, Buffalo Grove, IL). The automated protocol included heat retrieval at 88 degrees C for 15 min and protease retrieval at room temperature for 15 min. Stained slides were coverslipped and scanned using an Aperio ScanScope XT instrument (Leica Biosystems). Lean, fat, and fluid mass were measured in 5-h fasted mice using a LF90II-TD NMR (Bruker, Billerica, MA). Body weights were recorded weekly over the 12-week HFD feeding period. Energy balance was assessed using a Comprehensive Lab Animal Monitoring System (CLAMS) (Columbus Instruments, Columbus, OH). Animals were acclimated to the CLAMS 24 h prior to the start of experimentation. Forty-eight hour food intake, water intake, locomotor activity, EE, and respiratory exchange ratio (RER) were measured at 15-min intervals as previously described (4). Following cannulation, recovery, and acclimation, 18-h food intake was measured after PVN- or ARC-targeted delivery of 0.0025, 0.005, or 0.025 ug/100 nL GLP-1 or exendin-4 (Ex4) (R D Systems, Minneapolis, MN) or artificial cerebrospinal fluid (ACSF) (100 nL bilateral) vehicle (Harvard Apparatus, Holliston, MA) in 5-h fasted mice just prior to the onset of the dark cycle at 1800. For peripheral administration, 16-h food intake was measured in mice treated with Ex4 (3 ug/kg BW, i.p. ), liraglutide (200 ug/kg BW, s.c.; Novo Nordisk, Copenhagen, Denmark), or saline vehicle. Peripheral doses were chosen based on previously demonstrated anorectic efficacy (3,23). Glucose tolerance tests (GTTs) were performed on 5-h fasted mice. In chow-fed mice, 2 g/kg BW glucose was administered orally or intraperitoneally. In HFD-fed animals, 1 g/kg BW glucose was administered orally. GTTs were also performed in animals that received PVN- or ARC-targeted injections of Ex4 (0.025 ug/100 nL, bilateral) concurrent with an intraperitoneal glucose dose att= 0. In additional experiments, GLP-1RKDDeltaNkx2.1cre, GLP-1RKDDeltaSim1cre, and GLP-1Rf/fmice were dosed with the GLP-1R antagonist Ex9 (50 ug, i.p. ; American Peptide) or liraglutide (400 ug/kg, s.c.) 15 min (Ex9 studies) or 120 min (liraglutide studies) prior to an intraperitoneal GTT. Animals were fasted for 4 h, and glucose was administered at a fixed dose (200 uL 25% dextrose, Ex9 studies) or at 2 g/kg BW for liraglutide studies. Blood glucose measurements were made at the indicated time points. Glucose tolerance was calculated as area under the curve above baseline. Liraglutide (200 mug/kg BW s.c., BID as described by Secher et al. [17]) or isotonic saline was administered for 14 days in chow- and HFD-fed mice, and body weight was measured daily. Body weight was also measured daily during a 7-day recovery period, over which animals received no injection. Data are presented as mean +/- SEM. Differences between groups were determined by one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey or Newman-Keuls multiple comparison post hoc tests or by two-tailedttests as appropriate. Statistical significance was set toP less than 0.05. Consistent with previous studies in rats (5,14,15), targeting GLP-1 to the PVN (Fig. 1None) but not the ARC (Fig. 1None) significantly reduced food intake in mice. Targeting Ex4 to the PVN (Fig. 1None) or ARC (Fig. 1None) potently suppressed food intake, particularly during the first 12 h after administration. These findings demonstrate that pharmacological activation of the PVN or ARC GLP-1R reduces food intake in mice, although the magnitude and duration of the response depend on the GLP-1RA administered and region targeted. Direct injection of Ex4 into the PVN or ARC of the hypothalamus robustly suppresses food intake, whereas GLP-1 only modestly suppresses food intake. The values are mean +/- SEM and represent the time-course of cumulative 18-h food intake in chow-fed C57BL/6J mice receiving GLP-1 or Ex4 (0.0025, 0.005, or 0.025 ug) or ACSF (100 nL bilateral [PVN] or unilateral [ARC]) in the PVN (AandC) or ARC (BandD). n= 7-15 mice/group. *P less than 0.05 vs. ACSF. To test whether the hypothalamic GLP-1R is necessary for chronic maintenance of nutrient homeostasis, we bred floxedGlp1rmice with a line expressing Cre recombinase in multiple hypothalamic regions, Nkx2.1-Cre mice (19), to generate hypothalamicGlp1rknockout (GLP-1RKDDeltaNkx2.1cre) mice. Glp1rmRNA levels were significantly reduced in hypothalami from GLP-1RKDDeltaNkx2.1cremice, although not to the same extent as in GLP-1RKO mice (Fig. 2None). Glp1rmRNA levels were unaffected in the cortex (nonhypothalamic control) of GLP-1RKDDeltaNkx2.1cremice (Fig. 2None). As the PVN and ARC have been shown to mediate the anorectic effects of pharmacological GLP-1RA, we also generated mice lackingGlp1rexpression in the PVN (GLP-1RKDDeltaSim1cremice) and POMC neurons (GLP-1RKDDeltaPOMCcremice). Selective deletion in POMC neurons was chosen because theGlp1ris expressed in anorexigenic POMC but not in orexigenic NPY/AgRP neurons of the ARC (14). Knockdown of theGlp1rin GLP-1RKDDeltaSim1cremice was restricted to the PVN (Fig. 2None), and knockdown of theGlp1rin GLP-1RKDDeltaPOMCcremice was restricted to the ARC (Fig. 2None). A: Cre-recombinase site-selectively knocks down theGlp1rin the hypothalamus. The values are mean +/- SEM and represent gene expression levels of theGlp1rin RNA isolates from the hypothalamus or extrahypothalamic brain tissue of GLP-1Rf/f, GLP-1RKDDeltaNkx2.1cre, and GLP-1RKO mice as determined by qRT-PCR. n= 5 mice/group. *P less than 0.05 vs. GLP-1Rf/f. P less than 0.05 vs. GLP-1RKO. Representative histology images showingGlp1rRNA expression in PVN and ARC sections of GLP-1RKDDeltaPOMCcre(B) and GLP-1RKDDeltaSim1cre(C) mice, each compared with GLP-1Rf/fcontrols. Glp1rRNA expression is indicated as a red, chromogenic signal. Images are shown at both 200 mum and 300 mum (magnified area designated by the dashed box). Scale bars are 200 muM and 300 muM for the lower and higher magnification panels, respectively. 3V, third ventricle. Total, lean, and fat mass were unaltered in chow-fed GLP-1RKDDeltaNkx2.1cremice (Fig. 3None), although there was a tendency (P= 0.07) for reduced fat mass relative to total body mass as shown by ANCOVA (Supplementary Table 1). Disruption ofGlp1rexpression in chow-fed GLP-1RKDDeltaPOMCcre(Fig. 3None) and GLP-1RKDDeltaSim1cre(Fig. 3None) mice also had no effect on body weight or composition. GLP-1RKDDeltaNkx2.1cremice displayed significantly elevated 48-h food (Fig. 3None) and water (Supplementary Fig. 1None) intake. Basal 48-h EE was also elevated in GLP-1RKDDeltaNkx2.1cremice (Fig. 3None). This was not due to an appreciable increase in locomotor activity (Supplementary Fig. 1None), nor was there any change in the RER (Supplementary Fig. 1None). Increased EE in GLP-1RKDDeltaNkx2.1cremice occurred independently from food intake or total body mass (Supplementary Table 1). These results indicate that the hypothalamicGlp1rplays a role in the regulation of basal food intake and EE. Chow-fed GLP-1RKDDeltaNkx2.1cremice exhibit elevated food intake and EE, compared with GLP-1Rf/fcontrols. The values are mean +/- SEM and represent 5-h-fasted body composition (body weight, lean mass, and fat mass), cumulative 48-h food intake, and 48-h EE in GLP-1RKDDeltaNkx2.1cre(n= 12) (A,D, andG), GLP-1RKDDeltaPOMCcre(n= 10) (B,E, andH), and GLP-1RKDDeltaSim1cre(n= 11) (C,F, andI) mice, compared with GLP-1Rf/fcontrols (n= 12-15). *P less than 0.05 vs. GLP-1Rf/f. We next determined whether the elevated food intake and EE in GLP-1RKDDeltaNkx2.1cremice was due to loss ofGlp1rexpression in POMC neurons or the PVN. Knockdown ofGlp1rwithin POMC neurons conferred no changes in basal food intake (Fig. 3None) or EE (Fig. 3None). Although knockdown of the GLP-1R specifically within the PVN conferred no changes in basal food intake (Fig. 3None), there was a significant decrease in EE (Fig. 3None). There were no significant effects on water intake, RER, or locomotor activity in GLP-1RKDDeltaPOMCcreor GLP-1RKDDeltaSim1cremice (Supplementary Fig. 1). We next determined whether the body composition and energy balance phenotypes observed in chow-fed GLP-1RKDDeltaNkx2.1cremice persist after HFD feeding. GLP-1RKDDeltaNkx2.1cremice displayed a significantly reduced HFD-induced weight gain and fat mass (Fig. 4NoneandNone, respectively). In contrast to chow-fed animals, HFD-fed GLP-1RKDDeltaNkx2.1cremice did not exhibit increased 48-h food intake (Fig. 4None). Despite this, 48-h water intake was significantly elevated in GLP-1RKDDeltaNkx2.1cremice (Supplementary Fig. 2None). Forty-eight hour EE remained significantly elevated in GLP-1RKDDeltaNkx2.1cremice (Fig. 4None), and this was independent of the difference in total body weight, compared with controls (Supplementary Table 1). Elevated EE was not due to an appreciable difference in locomotor activity (Supplementary Fig. 2None). There was no difference in the RER (Supplementary Fig. 2None). Thus, loss ofGlp1rexpression in Nkx2.1-expressing neurons increases EE regardless of diet and independently of effects on food intake. Disruption of the GLP-1R in GLP-1RKDDeltaNkx2.1cre, GLP-1RKDDeltaPOMCcre, and GLP-1RKDDeltaSim1cremice differentially alters HFD-induced weight gain, body composition, and EE. The values are mean +/- SEM and represent HFD-induced body weight gain, body composition (body weight, lean mass, and fat mass), cumulative 48-h food intake, and 48-h EE in GLP-1RKDDeltaNkx2.1cre(n= 12) (A,D,G, andJ), GLP-1RKDDeltaPOMCcre(n= 9) (B,E,H, andK), and GLP-1RKDDeltaSim1cre(n= 11) (C,F,I, andL) mice, compared with GLP-1Rf/fcontrols (n= 12-15). *P less than 0.05 vs. GLP-1Rf/f. We assessed whether the protection from HFD-induced obesity and increased EE in GLP-1RKDDeltaNkx2.1cremice was due to loss ofGlp1rexpression in POMC neurons or the PVN. Contrary to GLP-1RKDDeltaNkx2.1cremice, GLP-1RKDDeltaPOMCcremice displayed increased HFD-induced weight gain (Fig. 4None). However, there were no significant differences in lean or fat mass between genotypes (Fig. 4None). No differences in HFD-induced weight gain or body composition were observed in GLP-1RKDDeltaSim1cremice (Fig. 4NoneandNone). Additional parameters of energy balance in these mice were unaltered (Fig. 4None,None,None, andNoneandSupplementary Fig. 2). These findings suggest that the energy balance phenotypes observed in GLP-1RKDDeltaNkx2.1cremice are not due to loss ofGlp1rexpression in the PVN or POMC neurons. We next tested the hypothesis that the loss of hypothalamicGlp1rexpression blunts the acute anorectic effect of peripherally dosed GLP-1RA. Suppression of food intake by Ex4 was equivalent in chow-fed GLP-1RKDDeltaNkx2.1cre, GLP-1RKDDeltaPOMCcre, and GLP-1RKDDeltaSim1cre(Fig. 5None-None), compared with their respective controls. Ex4 also suppressed food intake similarly in HFD-fed GLP-1RKDDeltaNkx2.1cre, GLP-1RKDDeltaPOMCcre, and GLP-1RKDDeltaSim1cre(Fig. 5None-None) mice, compared with controls. These findings show that the GLP-1R in Nkx2.1-expressing neurons and classic hypothalamic feeding centers (i.e., PVN and POMC neurons) is not required for the acute anorectic effects of peripherally administered GLP-1RA. Disruption of the GLP-1R in Nkx2.1 neurons, POMC neurons, or the PVN does not blunt the food intake-suppressive effect of peripherally dosed Ex4. The values are mean +/- SEM and represent 16-h food intake following treatment with Ex4 (3 ug, i.p.) in chow- or HFD-fed (top and bottom panels, respectively) GLP-1RKDDeltaNkx2.1cre(n= 11-12) (AandD), GLP-1RKDDeltaPOMCcre(n= 7-8) (BandE), and GLP-1RKDDeltaSim1cre(n= 11) (CandF) mice, compared with GLP-1Rf/fcontrols (n= 10-15). Data are shown at 4-h intervals and expressed as a percentage of the food intake response observed following treatment with vehicle. Liraglutide does not reduce 24-h food intake in mice with CNS deletion of the GLP-1R (3). We tested the hypothesis that this is due to loss of hypothalamicGlp1rexpression. Loss ofGlp1rexpression in Nkx2.1-expressing neurons did not affect the acute food intake-suppressive effect of liraglutide (Fig. 6None). We then tested whether loss of hypothalamicGlp1rexpression attenuates the body weight-reducing effects of a chronic dosing regimen of liraglutide. Secher et al. (17) recently demonstrated that the infusion of the GLP-1R antagonist Ex9 into the ARC partially attenuates the anorectic effects of a 14-day liraglutide treatment. We show that the body weight-reducing effect of liraglutide was unaffected in chow-fed GLP-1RKDDeltaNkx2.1cremice (Fig. 6None). However, loss of hypothalamicGlp1rexpression attenuated the weight-reducing effect of liraglutide in HFD-fed mice (Fig. 6None), suggesting that the hypothalamic GLP-1R is required for peripherally dosed liraglutide to exert its body weight-reducing effect during the metabolic stress of an HFD. Disruption of the GLP-1R in Nkx2.1 neurons does not blunt the food intake-suppressive effect of peripherally dosed liraglutide but does impact the compound's body weight-lowering effect in HFD-fed mice. A: The values are mean +/- SEM and represent 16-h food intake following treatment with liraglutide (Lira) (200 ug, s.c.) in chow-fed GLP-1RKDDeltaNkx2.1cre(n= 9) mice, compared with GLP-1Rf/fcontrols (n= 17). Data are shown at 4-h intervals and expressed as a percentage of the food intake response observed following treatment with vehicle. BandC: The values are mean +/- SEM and represent daily body weight over the course of 21 days in chow-fed (B) or HFD-fed (C) GLP-1RKDDeltaNkx2.1cre(n= 5-6), compared with GLP-1Rf/fcontrols (n= 8-11) treated with liraglutide. Data are expressed as a percentage of baseline (i.e., prior to liraglutide treatment) body weight. On days 0-13, morning body weight was measured, and animals received a twice-daily injection of liraglutide (200 ug/kg BW, s.c.) or vehicle. On recovery days 14-21, only morning body weight was measured. *P less than 0.05 vs. saline. P less than 0.05 vs. GLP-1Rf/f. Brain GLP-1R signaling modulates peripheral glucose production and/or utilization (14,24-27). We assessed the effect of targeted delivery of Ex4 to specific hypothalamic nuclei on glucose tolerance. An anorectic dose of Ex4 (0.025 ug) targeted to the PVN (Fig. 7None) or ARC (Fig. 7None), but not the cortex (Fig. 7None), improved glucose tolerance. Direct injection of Ex4 into the PVN or ARC of the hypothalamus robustly improves glucose tolerance, whereas disruption of the hypothalamic GLP-1R in GLP-1RKDDeltaNkx2.1cre, GLP-1RKDDeltaPOMCcre, and GLP-1RKDDeltaSim1cremice does not affect glucose tolerance. The values are mean +/- SEM and represent glucose excursion in chow-fed C57BL/6J mice following a gavage of glucose (2 g/kg BW, i.p.) and treatment with Ex4 (0.025 ug) or ACSF (100 nL) in the PVN (n= 8-9) (A), ARC (n= 7-8) (B), or cortex (n= 8-9) (C) att= 0 min. Inset: Area under the curve (AUC) above baseline for each group. *P less than 0.05 vs. ACSF. The values are mean +/- SEM and represent glucose excursion in chow- or HFD-fed GLP-1RKDDeltaNkx2.1cre(n= 9-12) (D,G, andJ), GLP-1RKDDeltaPOMCcre(n= 7-10) (E,H, andK), and GLP-1RKDDeltaSim1cre(n= 9-11) (F,I, andL) mice, compared with GLP-1Rf/fcontrols (n= 10-15). D,E, andF: chow diet, oral GTT;G,H, andI: chow diet, intraperitoneal GTT;J,K, andL: HFD, oral GTT. Inset: AUC above baseline for each group. *P less than 0.05 vs. ACSF. We then assessed whether the loss ofGlp1rexpression in the Nkx2.1 neurons, PVN, or POMC neurons impairs glucose handling. Oral (Fig. 7None-None) and intraperitoneal (Fig. 7None-None) glucose tolerance was identical in chow-fed GLP-1RKDDeltaNkx2.1cre, GLP-1RKDDeltaPOMCcre, and GLP-1RKDDeltaSim1cremice, compared with respective controls. Similarly, oral glucose tolerance was unaffected by the loss ofGlp1rexpression in these brain regions in HFD-fed mice (Fig. 7None-None). Pretreatment with the GLP-1R antagonist Ex9 impaired glucose tolerance similarly in GLP-1RKDDeltaNkx2.1creand GLP-1RKDDeltaSim1cremice (Fig. 8None). Thus, although pharmacological activation of the hypothalamic GLP-1R improves glucose tolerance, GLP-1R in this brain region is not necessary for glucose handling. Disruption of the GLP-1R in GLP-1RKDDeltaNkx2.1creand GLP-1RKDDeltaSim1cremice does not impact glucose tolerance following pretreatment with Ex9 or liraglutide (Lira). The values are mean +/- SEM and represent glucose excursion in chow-fed GLP-1RKDDeltaNkx2.1cre(n= 7-10) and GLP-1RKDDeltaSim1cre(n= 7-12) pretreated with Ex9 (50 ug, i.p.) vs. vehicle (A) or liraglutide (400 ug/kg BW, s.c.) vs. vehicle (B) 15 min (for Ex9 studies) or 120 min (for liraglutide studies) prior to an intraperitoneal glucose challenge. Inset: Area under the curve (AUC) above baseline for each group. *P less than 0.05 vs. saline. P less than 0.05 vs. GLP-1Rf/f. Neuronal-wide deletion of the GLP-1R does not affect the ability of liraglutide to improve glucose tolerance (3). However, global CNS deletion of GLP-1R could mask the contributions of specific brain regions to the regulation of glucose tolerance. Pretreatment with liraglutide improves intraperitoneal glucose tolerance similarly in both GLP-1RKDDeltaNkx2.1creand GLP-1RKDDeltaSim1cremice (Fig. 8None), suggesting that the hypothalamic GLP-1R is not required for the glucoregulatory effect of peripherally administered liraglutide. GLP-1RA suppress food intake and reduce body weight via food intake-regulatory brain regions including the hypothalamus and brain stem (17,28). We and others have shown that GLP-1RA targeted to the hindbrain (29) and hypothalamic nuclei, including the PVN (30), DMH (5), and ARC, reduce food intake. However, these acute pharmacological interventions do not reflect the physiological, long-term regulation of feeding by brain GLP-1R. The present studies assessed the impact of selectively knocking down hypothalamicGlp1rexpression on overall energy balance. Glp1rexpression was disrupted in Nkx2.1-expressing neurons, PVN, or POMC neurons to address whether these regions are necessary for the anorectic and glucoregulatory effects of GLP-1RA. We report that loss ofGlp1rexpression in these three regions does not affect energy balance or responsiveness to peripheral administration of GLP-1RA. This is surprising as targeted administration of GLP-1RA to these regions potently reduces food intake and improves glucose tolerance. These findings demonstrate that classic GLP-1RA-responsive hypothalamic neurons are not necessary for the anorectic and glucoregulatory effects of GLP-1RA. The GLP-1R is expressed in extrahypothalamic food intake-regulatory regions, including the central amygdala, hindbrain, and area postrema (31). Several studies have also shown that targeting GLP-1RA to reward regions, including the ventral tegmental area (32), nucleus accumbens (33), and lateral parabrachial nucleus (LPBN) (34), suppresses food intake. Thus, CNS GLP-1R signaling could reduce food intake and body weight by decreasing the hedonic value of food (35). Anorectic effects of GLP-1RA may also be secondary to homeostatic stress (36,37). GLP-1 signaling in the PVN and hindbrain regulates the behavioral, autonomic, and neuroendocrine responses to stress by activating both the "fight or flight" response acutely and the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis chronically (36-40). Moreover, the central GLP-1R system is activated in response to stressful stimuli, which can themselves reduce food intake and elevate blood glucose (37,41). The GLP-1R is also expressed in peripheral vagal afferent neurons (42), yet the extent to which these neurons relay gut-derived GLP-1R signals to the brain to mediate satiating and glucoregulatory responses remains controversial. Kanoski et al. (18) demonstrated that the anorectic effects of peripherally dosed Ex4 and liraglutide involve the activation of GLP-1R both on vagal afferents and in the CNS, whereas Secher et al. (17) report that subdiaphragmatic vagal afferent deafferentation does not impact the food intake- and body weight-lowering effects of peripherally dosed liraglutide. GLP-1RKDDeltaNkx2.1cremice display elevated 48-h food intake and EE. The net effect likely explains the absence of a body weight effect in these mice. Knockdown of the GLP-1R in the PVN or POMC neurons did not recapitulate the increased food intake and EE phenotypes observed in GLP-1RKDDeltaNkx2.1cremice, suggesting that alternativeGlp1r-expressing hypothalamic regions, such as the VMH, DMH, or LH (31), may be involved in regulating these processes. We then hypothesized that the loss of hypothalamicGlp1rwould exacerbate the metabolic derangements of HFD feeding. On the contrary, GLP-1RKDDeltaNkx2.1cremice were protected from HFD-induced weight and fat mass gain. This was not due to reduced food intake. Instead, the elevated EE observed in chow-fed GLP-1RKDDeltaNkx2.1cremice persisted with HFD feeding, demonstrating that loss of hypothalamicGlp1rexpression increases EE independently of food intake. This is surprising because ICV or hypothalamic administration of GLP-1RA increases EE (15,43). Loss of hypothalamicGlp1rexpression may increase sensitivity to GLP-1 in other brain regions, thus elevating EE. However, whole-bodyGlp1rKO mice also exhibit increased EE (44). Paradoxically, loss of POMCGlp1rexpression increased HFD-induced weight gain, suggesting distinct roles for GLP-1R signaling in different hypothalamic regions. Elevated HFD-induced weight gain in GLP-1RKDDeltaPOMCcremice was not associated with significant changes in body composition, food intake, or EE. One potential explanation is that weight gain was measured in ad libitum-fed conditions, whereas body composition was measured in 5-h fasted mice. Thus, POMC GLP-1R may regulate the handling of nutrient stores during fasting. Unlike Nkx2.1 neuron- and POMC-specificGlp1rknockdown models, GLP-1RKDDeltaSim1cremice displayed no effects on body composition or energy balance parameters. These observations highlight the complexity of brain GLP-1R actions on the maintenance of energy balance and suggest that different hypothalamic nuclei mediate distinct effects of GLP-1, consistent with previous findings demonstrating nuclei-specific effects of GLP-1R signaling in visceral illness and hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis activation (16). Peripheral administration of GLP-1RA reduces food intake and body weight, likely due, in part, to their ability to cross the blood-brain barrier (17,45). Indeed, disruption of pan-neuronalGlp1rexpression inhibits the anorectic effects of peripherally administered liraglutide (3). We hypothesized that this is due to the loss of hypothalamicGlp1rexpression. Surprisingly, the acute anorectic effects of peripherally dosed Ex4 and liraglutide were preserved in our hypothalamic GLP-1RKO models. We then tested whether the hypothalamic GLP-1R mediates the long-term weight loss effects of GLP-1RA. Targeted delivery of the GLP-1R antagonist Ex9 to the ARC attenuates the weight loss effect of a 14-day liraglutide dosing regimen (17). In the present studies, chow-fed GLP-1RKDDeltaNkx2.1cremice displayed similar weight loss as controls following a 14-day liraglutide treatment but were refractory to liraglutide-induced weight loss when fed an HFD. Importantly, in both the present studies and those by Secher et al. (17), pharmacological or genetic blockade of the ARC or POMC GLP-1R did not prevent the initial weight loss induced by liraglutide. These findings implicate other hypothalamic regions and/or extrahypothalamic regions as mediators of the anorexigenic effects of GLP-1RA. Modulation of the brain GLP-1R affects glucose production and utilization under hyperinsulinemic conditions (24,46). We show that glucose tolerance is identical in GLP-1RKDDeltaNkx2.1cre, GLP-1RKDDeltaSim1cre, and GLP-1RKDDeltaPOMCcremice, compared with controls. Moreover, Ex9 impaired glucose tolerance in GLP-1RKDDeltaNkx2.1creand GLP-1RKDDeltaSim1cremice, suggesting that these GLP-1R populations do not mediate Ex9-induced impairments in glucose homeostasis. This is distinct from observations in beta-cell GLP-1RKO mice in which Ex9 does not impair glucose tolerance (47). Liraglutide improved glucose tolerance in GLP-1RKDDeltaNkx2.1creand GLP-1RKDDeltaSim1cremice to similar degrees as their respective controls. These observations were surprising considering that targeted delivery of Ex4 to the PVN and ARC improved glucose tolerance. Nevertheless, these results support observations by Sisley et al. (3) that loss of CNS GLP-1R expression does not affect glucose tolerance or the glucoregulatory effects of liraglutide. Although the Cre lines in these studies primarily target hypothalamic neurons, there are interpretative caveats, including incomplete Cre expression and off-target effects. We achieved only a ?50% reduction inGlp1rexpression in GLP-1RKDDeltaNkx2.1cremice. One potential explanation is that Nkx2.1 is expressed in GABAergic but not glutamatergic neurons (48), raising the possibility that GLP-1R may remain expressed in hypothalamic glutamatergic neurons. Sim1 is not only expressed in the PVN, but it is also enriched in the cerebellum, midbrain, and hippocampus (21). Although enriched in the ARC, POMC is also expressed in the hippocampus and hindbrain (20). Moreover, there are non-POMC and non-NPY/AgRP ARC neurons that are GLP-1R positive (14). These studies demonstrate that GLP-1R expression within two hypothalamic regions typically assigned a prominent role in regulating energy balance, the ARC and PVN, is sufficient but not necessary for the effects of GLP-1RA on energy balance and highlights the importance of combining targeted pharmacological and genetic approaches to unravel the complex mechanisms by which GLP-1RA maintain nutrient homeostasis. The identification of overlapping CNS sites of action and signaling pathways for GLP-1R-mediated regulation of homeostatic and hedonic aspects of feeding behavior may inform the development of more effective therapies for type 2 diabetes and obesity.