Argonaute proteins are the effectors of diverse modes of small RNA-mediated gene silencing, and are guided to appropriate targets by their associated small RNAsNone. Major Argonaute clients include ~22 nucleotide (nt) microRNAs (miRNAs) and ~21 nt small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) that associate with particular members of the Ago-clade subfamily, and ~24-30 nt Piwi-interacting RNAs (piRNAs) that associate with the Piwi-clade subfamily of Argonautes. Much remains to be understood about piRNA biogenesis, but the generation of miRNAs and siRNAs is relatively well-documentedNone. siRNAs generally derive from cleavage of double-strand RNAs by the Dicer RNase III enzyme into siRNA duplexes that load into Argonautes, followed by maturation into a single-stranded siRNA:Argonaute complex. Primary miRNA transcripts contain hairpins that are excised by the nuclear RNase III Drosha and its double-stranded RNA binding partner DGCR8 (known as Pasha in invertebrates). The resulting pre-miRNA hairpins are then cleaved in the cytoplasm by Dicer into miRNA/star duplexes that load Argonautes and mature into single-stranded form. In addition, a variety of non-canonical pathways generate functional miRNAs independently of Drosha and/or Dicer, by exploiting diverse RNases that normally mature other types of transcriptsNone. siRNA function is mediated by the cleavage activity ofDrosophilaAGO2 and vertebrate Ago2, whereas miRNA function requires the Argonaute partner GW182, which associates withDrosophilaAGO1 and all four vertebrate Ago-class ArgonautesNone. Homeostatic and feedback mechanisms coordinate levels of miRNAs with their effector proteins, or harmonize the level of small RNA biogenesis factors that function within complexesNone. For example, in vertebrates and flies, an elegant feedback loop normalizes levels of Drosha and DGCR8None-None. DGCR8transcripts are destabilized by 5' hairpins that are directly cleaved by Drosha, while DGCR8 protein is reciprocally unstable in the absence of Drosha. These cross-regulatory interactions maintain appropriate stoichiometry of the Drosha-DGCR8 complex. Further studies in plantNone,Noneand animalNone-Nonesystems uncovered requirements for the Hsp90 machinery in Argonaute loading and/or stability. Hsp90-co-chaperone complexes also facilitate loading of Piwi proteinsNone, and loss of piRNA biogenesis components results in cell-autonomous loss of Piwi proteinNone. Despite these accumulating links of small RNA biogenesis pathways to the stability of their effector Argonautes, multiple previous studies did not apparently reveal alteration of theDrosophilamiRNA effector AGO1 upon depletion of miRNA biogenesis factors in cultured S2 cellsNone-None. We re-evaluated this in the animal using null mutant clones ofdrosha,pasha, anddicer-1, all of which demonstrate reduction of AGO1. We show that AGO1 is degraded by the ubiquitin-proteasome system in the animal, and AGO1 is detectably stabilized by transgenic expression of miRNAs, demonstrating a homeostatic mechanism. We extend these findings to mammals, since Ago2 exhibits lower stability inDicer-knockout cells. We could rescue Ago2 stability by inhibiting the proteasome or by introducing Dicer-independentmir-451-type constructs. Importantly, non-cleavablepre-mir-451hairpins associated with Ago2 but did not rescue its stability, indicating that the active miRISC and not simply RNA-associated Argonaute is protected from degradation. The deep conservation of a strategy by which Argonaute protein levels are sensitive to miRNA availability reflects its importance for appropriate miRNA effector function. Tests from several different laboratories, albeit usually conducted for other reasons, have not revealed substantial alteration of miRNA effector AGO1 protein level upon knockdown of any miRNA biogenesis factorsNone-None. Having generated a panel of mutants in core miRNA factorsNone,None, we evaluated whether AGO1 protein was sensitive to miRNA biogenesis in the animal. We generated homozygous mutant ovarian germline clones using the Flp-FRT system, which negatively marked mutant cells by absence of GFP. We stained these with specific AGO1 antibodiesNone, which in ovaries bearing control germline clones detects somatic and germline expression, with higher levels in the oocyte (Fig. 1a). As expected, germline clones ofAGO1mutants showed decreased staining (Fig. 1a). Strikingly, germline clones ofpashaanddicer-1similarly showed reduction of AGO1 protein (Fig. 1a), and analysis of three additionaldicer-1alleles yielded similar results (Supplementary Fig. 1). We confirmed these findings in somatic tissues, and used the mosaic analysis with a repressible cell marker (MARCM) system to positively mark mutant clones with GFP. While control wing imaginal disc MARCM clones did not show alteration of AGO1 levels (Figure 1b), clones bearing null alleles ofpasha,drosha, anddicer-1were all strongly deficient for AGO1 protein (Figure 1b). In addition, clonal analysis of twopashamutants and sixdicer-1mutants in larval brain lobes all exhibited decreased AGO1 staining (Supplementary Fig. 2). Therefore, accumulation of the miRNA effector AGO1 depends on miRNA biogenesis, in diverse tissues and developmental stages. A previous report did not reveal alteration of AGO1 protein level upon depletion of its cofactor GW182 in S2 cellsNone. As GW182 is encoded on chromosome 4, which is not amenable to mitotic recombination, we utilized aGW182-RNAitransgene. We validated that expression of this transgene reduces GW182 protein cell-autonomously (Fig. 1c) and de-represses the endogenous miRNA target Mei-P26None,Noneto similar levels seen inpasha,drosha, anddicer-1clones (Supplementary Fig. 3a). Interestingly, depletion of GW182 caused AGO1 protein to accumulate (Fig. 1c). This was unexpected given that mammalian GW182 was reported to protect exogenously transfected miRNAs from exonucleolytic degradationNone. Mei-P26 is an E3 ubiquitin ligase that binds AGO1 and regulates miRNA levelsNone. However, as mutant clones ofdrosha,pasha,dicer-1, andGW182all deregulate Mei-P26, but onlyGW182mutant cells increase AGO1, we inferred that Mei-P26 was unlikely to be a major determinant of AGO1 stability in imaginal discs. We confirmed this by showing that while clones that misexpress Mei-P26 exhibit compromised growthNone, they maintain relatively normal levels of AGO1 (Supplementary Fig. 3b). The opposing effects of loss of core miRNA biogenesis factors and the loss ofGW182on AGO1 accumulation provided an opportunity forin vivoepistasis analysis. We generated MARCM clones that were simultaneously homozygous for a null allele ofdcr-1and expressedGW182-RNAiand GFP. These clones clearly displayed the AGO1 protein loss phenotype (Figure 1c), demonstrating that accumulation of AGO1 upon GW182 loss is strictly dependent on active miRNA biogenesis. With knowledge of thesein vivodata, we re-assessed the situation inDrosophilaS2 cells. Although previous studies confirmed efficient depletion of target proteins and/or accumulation of miRNA precursors, perusal of the literature indicates difficulty of fully depleting mature miRNAs by knockdown of miRNA biogenesis componentsNone,None-None. We utilized a double knockdown strategy (2x4 days soaking with dsRNA) for maximal efficacy. These trials yielded strong loss of AGO1 protein upon knockdown ofdrosha,pasha, anddicer-1, compared to untreated cells or controlGFPdsRNA (Fig. 2a). In contrast, knockdown ofGW182reproducibly increased AGO1 levels (Fig. 2a). These effects were paralleled by the behaviour of endogenous miR-34, levels of which were strongly decreased upon knockdown of miRNA biogenesis factors and mildly increased uponGW182knockdown (Fig. 2b). The latter data may potentially imply that AGO1 turnover is altered when the effector complex is disrupted. A population of mature miR-34 was maintained inAGO1knockdown cells despite near absence of AGO1; these species exhibited altered length profile (Fig. 2b) and likely reflected sorting to AGO2. We tested independentAGO1amplicons and observed no reproducible alteration ofAGO1transcripts following knockdown of miRNA biogenesis factors (Fig. 2c), suggesting a post-transcriptional mechanism. This was supported by similarAGO1transcript levels in homozygouspashalarvae compared to wild-type (Fig. 2d). Overall, our ability to recapitulate phenotypes from mutant clones with S2 cell knockdowns demonstrated that positive regulation of AGO1 stability by miRNA biogenesis is a general phenomenon, and appears to act post-transcriptionally. Given these results, we investigated whether the RNAi effector AGO2 was sensitive to siRNA biogenesis. We introduced a FLAG-HA-AGO2 genomic transgene that supports full RNAi functionNone,Noneinto thedcr-2[L811fsX]homozygous mutant background, which lacks siRNA biogenesis capacity and RNAi capacityNone, and confirmed genotypes by PCR (Fig. 2e). We extended our previous studiesNoneby showing that AGO2 protein levels were unaltered indcr-2null ovaries and heads (Fig. 2f). Therefore, although both AGO1 and AGO2 are loaded using Hsp90-dependent mechanismsNone,None, the miRNA effector AGO1 is uniquely subject to turnover in the unloaded state. We reciprocally asked whether overproduction of miRNAs could influence AGO1 levels. Imaginal disc clones expressing DsRed or different individual UAS-miRNA transgenes did not reveal substantial effects on AGO1 protein levels (Fig. 3a). However, expression of a 3-miRNA cluster (mir-12, mir-283, mir-304) and 4-miRNA cluster (mir-9c, mir-79, mir-9b, mir-306), both resulted in clear cell-autonomous accumulation of AGO1 protein (Fig. 3b). The strongest effects were seen in clones expressing the 8-miRNA cluster containingmir-309, mir-3, mir-286, mir-4, mir-5, mir-6-1, mir-6-2, mir-6-3(Fig. 3b). Thus, increasing AGO1 levels correlated with the number of ectopically expressed miRNAs. In contrast, clonal overexpression of an RNAi trigger to generate ectopic siRNAs (shep-RNAi) did not alter AGO1 (Fig. 3c). This was consistent with the bulk sorting of siRNAs into theDrosophilaRNAi effector, AGO2. We also analyzed the effect of ectopic miRNAs in the ovary. Similar to imaginal discs, ectopic expression ofmir-124, but not a non-processed mutantmir-124construct, elevated AGO1 in ovarian follicle cells (Fig. 3d). Altogether, these data fulfil a homeostatic mechanism in that loss and gain of miRNA biogenesis induce reciprocal effects on AGO1 accumulation. We hypothesized that the ubiquitin-proteasome system might mediate AGO1 homeostasis. We exploited a transgene encoding a dominant temperature sensitive subunit of the proteasome (UAS-DTS5), which we expressed along the anterior-posterior boundary of the wing imaginal disc usingptc-Gal4(Fig. 3e). We introduced anhs-AGO1transgene in the genetic background, so that we could monitor the outcome of a pulse of AGO1 expression across a timecourse, comparing wild-type cells with neighboring cells in which proteasome activity was impaired. Following a 15-minute heat-shock, AGO1 protein levels were greatly elevated throughout the disc, with further accumulation within the DTS5-expressing domain (Fig. 3e). Four hours after induction, the levels of AGO1 returned to normal endogenous levels throughout the disc, except within the DTS5-expressing domain (Fig. 3e). These data demonstrate that exogenous AGO1 is rapidly turned over by a proteasome-dependent mechanism. We complemented these tests by assessing if endogenous AGO1 is regulated by ubiquitination. We were unable to recover imaginal disc clones expressing an RNAi transgene to the sole ubiquitin activating enzymeUba1(data not shown), likely due to cell competition or cell lethality. However, we could recover such clones in the ovarian follicular epithelium, and these clones super-accumulated AGO1 protein (Fig. 3f). Therefore, endogenous AGO1 protein is restricted by ubiquitination. We sought to extend these findings to mammalian cells. An excellent model is a stableDicer-/-mouse embryonic fibroblast (MEF) cell line that we have extensively characterizedNone. Although Western analysis detected endogenous mouse Ago2 (mAgo2) protein in these cells, time course analyses following cycloheximide (CHX) treatment showed that mAgo2 was destabilized inDicer-/-cells (Fig. 4a). We assessed whether mAgo2 accumulation was sensitive to the restoration of endogenous miRNA biogenesis. Transfection ofDicer-/-cells with a FLAG-Dicer construct strongly rescued processing of endogenous let-7a into mature miRNAs (Fig. 4b). Concomitant with this, we indeed observed that completion of miRNA biogenesis substantially increased Ago2 stability (Fig. 4c). We attempted to assess mAgo1, but did not detect its endogenous accumulation inDicer-/-cells (Supplementary Fig. 4a). As an alternative, we transfected myc-hAgo1 intoDicer-/-cells and observed that its decay was slower than endogenous mAgo2 (Supplementary Fig. 4b). However, myc-hAgo2 did not recapitulate the instability of mAgo2. Moreover, transfection of either construct impaired the decay of endogenous mAgo2 (Supplementary Fig. 4b). We infer that this may reflect the recruitment of ectopic and endogenous Ago proteins into aggregatesNone, whose loading potential and stability control might be altered. We therefore concentrated our further studies on endogenous mAgo2. mAgo2transcript levels inDicer-/-cells were unaltered by CHX or FLAG-Dicer plasmid (Fig. 4d), pointing to regulation of mAgo2 protein stability. Analogous to genetic manipulations of theDrosophilaproteasome, addition of the proteasome inhibitor MG132 suppressed mAgo2 protein decay inDicer-/-cells treated with CHX (Fig. 4e). Given the recent report that autophagy regulates Argonaute levels in mammalian cellsNone, we also treatedDicer-/-cells with the autophagy inhibitor Bafilomycin A1. This did not perturb mAgo2 levels during a 2-6 hour timecourse, even though we confirmed strong inhibition of autophagy by accumulation of LC3-II at all timepoints (Supplementary Fig. 5a). Moreover, Bafilomycin A1 did not rescue the instability of AGO1 inDrosophilaS2 cells depleted of various miRNA biogenesis factors (Supplementary Fig. 5b). Double treatments suggested a mild stabilizing effect of Bafilomycin A1 inDicer-/-cells beyond the effect of MG132 (Supplementary Fig. 5c). However, we were cautious to interpret this as a parallel pathway, given the possibility of indirect effects in this triple drug treatment. Interestingly, we could also improve Ago2 stability inDicer-/-cells just by transfecting them with synthetic siRNAs (Fig. 4f). Similar findings were reported that synthetic siRNAs stabilize mammalian Argonautes in the presence of Hsp90 inhibitorsNone. These observations implied that RNA-loaded mAgo2 is more resistant to degradation. We tested cellular strategies to rescue miRNA biogenesis inDicercells. Vertebrate miR-451 matures via a Dicer-independent mechanism that involves direct loading of its short pre-miRNA hairpin into Ago2, followed by slicing of the complementary strand and resection of its 3' endNone. We subsequently showed that functional miR-451 could be efficiently expressed in a Drosha and Dicer-independent fashion using atRNA-mir-451fusionNone. We exploited this as a genetic strategy to express mature miRNAs from a nuclear context inDicer-/-MEFs, and these accumulated efficiently in mAgo2 (Fig. 5a). For comparison, we generated atRNA-mir-155fusion that includes the endogenous Dicer-substratepre-mir-155hairpin. Northern blotting of mAgo2 immunoprecipitates fromDicer-/-MEFs transfected with these constructs showed they containpre-mir-155hairpin, but not mature miR-155 (Fig. 5a). Northern blotting does not directly demonstrate that the detected small RNAs constitute a substantial fraction of total small RNAs in these cells. We therefore performed end labeling of total RNAs from mAgo2 immunoprecipitates. Strikingly, we observed that cells transfected withtRNA-mir-451accumulated specific RNAs in the less than 30nt range corresponding to matured miR-451 species (Fig. 5b). On the other hand, cells transfected withtRNA-mir-155accumulated a ~60 nt band at a level higher than controlDicer-/-MEFs or ones expressingtRNA-mir-451(Fig. 5b); we infer this to correspond topre-mir-155. Therefore these tRNA constructs generate sufficient levels of small RNAs to impact the total small RNA pool inDicer-/-cells. With these validations in hand, we compared their effects on mAgo2 levels. Transfection oftRNA-mir-451substantially rescued instability of mAgo2 inDicer-/-cells following CHX treatment (Fig. 5c). In contrast,tRNA-mir-155provided only slight improvement of mAgo2 stability compared to emptytRNA-lysvector alone (Fig. 5c). Immunoprecipitation experiments confirmed the reduction of mAgo2 under these conditions (Supplementary Fig. 4c). Therefore, while a population of pre-miRNA hairpins have the capacity to associate with mAgo2 in the absence of Dicer (Fig. 5a, b), these are not competent to protect mAgo2 from turnover. To provide further evidence for this, we generated atRNA-mir-451cleavage mutant (CM) bearing centrally bulged sites, a configuration that is competent for Ago loading but incompetent for mAgo2 cleavageNone. We confirmed thattRNA-mir-451CMloads into mAgo2 inDicer-/-cells but remains arrested as apre-mir-451hairpin (Fig. 5d). We observed thattRNA-mir-451-CMwas unable to stabilize mAgo2 (Fig. 5e), providing further evidence that mere RNA association may not suffice for mAgo2 stability. We hypothesize that the conformation of pre-miRNA-loaded Ago differs from the mature single-stranded complex, and that only the latter is fully licensed for stabilityin vivo. Finally, we returned to theDrosophilasystem to ask whether the reintroduction of small RNAs could rescue the instability of AGO1 in cells with impaired miRNA biogenesis. As Dicer-independent miRNAs have not yet been identified in this species, we turned to synthetic small RNA duplexes. This experimental strategy has the advantage of using theDrosophila-specific feature of Argonaute sorting to potentially distinguish the impact of siRNA loading from miRNA loading on AGO1 stability. We earlier used synthetic miR-276a duplexes to dissect the mechanism of AGO1 loading in vitroNone. Here, we evaluated the capacity of synthetic wild-type miR-276a duplex to repress target sensors when transfected into S2 cells. Both mature and star species ofmir-276aare competent for target regulation of cognate luciferase sensors, when expressed as pri-miRNA transcripts from transfected plasmidsNone(Fig. 5f). However, we obtained much stronger repression of these sensors in S2 cells transfected with the synthetic miR-276a duplex, indicating that it efficiently populates functional Argonaute complexes. We utilized S2 cells that were doubly treated withGFP,drosha,pasha, ordicer-1dsRNA, and further introduced either synthetic fully-paired siRNA duplex (used in mammalian cell tests inFig. 4f) or miR-276a duplex. We observed a mild improvement of AGO1 stability in the absence of miRNA biogenesis with the siRNA duplex, but observed robust recovery of AGO1 accumulation in the presence of synthetic miR-276a duplex (Fig. 5g). These tests specifically demonstrate that sorting of small RNAs to AGO1 are indeed required to maintain AGO1 stability. Model figures of small RNA biogenesis pathways often provide the impression that these processes are constitutive, inflexible and inexorable. However, diverse mechanisms that regulate small RNA biogenesis and function have been uncovered recentlyNone. Notably, many of these mechanisms provide homeostatic control over the levels of small RNA biogenesis factors and/or their resultant small RNAs. The revised picture is that small RNA biogenesis and function are subject to constant tuning to maintain appropriate levels of the factors involved, and to provide systems that permit reversibility or enhancement of small RNA functions. In this sense, our knowledge of small RNA pathways has now come to par with other signaling pathways and regulatory networks, which are almost universally subject to multilayer regulation. In this study, we used bothDrosophilaand mammalian systems to demonstrate sensitive mechanisms that normalize levels of miRNA biogenesis to the abundance of Argonaute effector proteins. Recent structural studies of full-length mammalian Argonaute provide a framework for rationalizing the turnover of unloaded Argonautes, including the observation that Ago2 adopts a protease-resistant tight structure upon complexing with a small RNANone,None. This perspective is complemented by studies using Hsp90 inhibitors, which demonstrate conformational changes are required to load Argonautes with small RNAs leading to a stable stateNone-None. While this work was under revision, Gregory and colleagues reported that loss of miRNA biogenesis in ES cells (bearingDGCR8orDicermutations) similarly results in post-transcriptional loss of mAgo2 proteinNone. Our work agrees with this, and broadens this concept across multiple species, including both germline and somatic cells. In addition, our studies not only highlight that loss of miRNA biogenesis destabilizes Argonaute proteins, but that an excess of Argonaute proteins are normally made and can be stabilized by increasing miRNA transcription. We demonstrated this by clonal analysis of single-copy inducible miRNA transgenes, within the intact animal, and showed that activating the transcription of various miRNA loci was sufficient to elevate AGO1 protein levels (Fig. 3). Such a homeostatic response was not expected, given that elevation of Argonaute proteins can increase the abundance of siRNAsNoneor miRNAsNone,Noneand that quantitative measurements indicated an excess of miRNA species over Argonaute proteinsNone, at least in certain systems. We note that the effects of elevated Argonaute proteins has mostly been studied with respect to co-transfected miRNA constructs and siRNAs; thus, influence of this manipulation on endogenous miRNA pools remain to be understood. In addition, miRNA:Argonaute stoichiometry was examined in cancer cellsNone, and remains to be studied in tissues, or at least primary cellsNone. We believe that it makes physiological sense for there to be excess Argonaute proteins relative to miRNAs, since if Argonautes were limiting, then mere tissue-specific changes in the overall transcription of miRNA loci might result in substantial competition for Argonaute occupancy. This would not rule out that the transcription of Argonaute genes might itself be regulated to help normalize their protein levels with overall tissue-specific changes in bulk miRNA transcription; perhaps both strategies work in concert. Interestingly, we find that theDrosophilaRNAi effector AGO2 is not sensitive to the status of siRNA biogenesis. Why might homeostatic mechanisms exist specifically for miRNA effector Argonautes? One possibility is to prevent the misloading of unintended small RNAs into miRISCs, since this regulatory complex has capacity to regulate off-targets bearing minimal sequence complementarity. We showed that the RNAi pathway actively prevents loading of endo-siRNAs into AGO1None, and a trimming and tailing mechanism further culls siRNAs loaded into miRISCs based on their atypically extensive target pairingNone. The destabilization of unloaded miRNA effectors may be another mechanism to ensure purity of this Argonaute pool. On the other hand, the rarity of extensively-paired "siRNA-type" targets may mean that misloading of AGO2 is better tolerated, and perhaps a pool of unloaded AGO2 may ensure a timely response to viral infections by allowing large amounts of siRISC to be generated quickly. The ubiquitin-proteasome system contributes to Argonaute homeostasis, extending a theme from other recent studies that demonstrate temporal or cell state-specific ubiquitination and degradation of Argonaute and Piwi proteinsNone,None. In support of this notion, we utilize not only chemical inhibitors, but also genuine genetic manipulations of the proteasome. We showed thatDrosophilaAGO1 is increased in cells depleted ofuba1(the soleDrosophilaubiquitin activating enzyme) or that express a dominant-negative proteasome subunit (DTS5), indicating that excess miRNA Argonaute effectors are being turned over in vivo. Recently, autophagy was reported to degrade Ago2 in HeLa cellsNoneand inDGCR8-/-ES cellsNone. The latter work is consistent with conclusions regarding instability of Argonautes in the absence of miRNA biogenesis. On the other hand, we did not observe substantial effects of autophagy inhibition in either ourDrosophilaor mouse cell culture systems, even though we confirmed defective autophagy by accumulation of LC3-II (Supplementary Fig. 5). However, it is conceivable that both degradation pathways contribute to the observed phenomenon, with the relative contributions being determined by cell type and culture conditions. Finally, our studies used novel non-canonical miRNA expression vectors to distinguish between the pre-miRNA-associated Argonaute state and the mature, functional miRISC state. In particular, our results indicate that Argonaute stability is not only sensitive to the overall availability of miRNAs, but also to its state as a mature complex (Fig. 5). Therefore, even thoughDicer-/-cells accumulate pre-miRNAs, and these can associate with Argonaute proteinsNone, RNA association alone does not seem sufficient for full stability. In combination with our data thatDrosophilaAGO1 can be stabilized by increasing miRNA transcription, we conclude that metazoan cells harbor sensitive mechanisms that actively harmonize the levels of miRNA effector Argonautes to the status of miRNA biogenesis. Mutant alleles and transgenes described in this work includeAGO1[k08121]None,AGO1[14]None,dcr-1[Q1147X]None,dcr-1[21B2]None,dicer-1[30D2]None,dicer-1[37A1]None,dicer-1[38E3]None,pasha[KO]None, pasha[36B2]None,drosha[21K11]None,GW182-RNAi(VDRC #103581), shep-RNAi(VDRC #37863),hs-AGO1None,UAS-DTS5None,UAS-mir-124andUAS-mir-124-mutantNone, and otherUAS-miRNAtransgenes recently described from a genome-wide collectionNone. ptc-gal4, anduba1-RNAi(TRiP line) were obtained from the Bloomington Stock Center. Imaginal disc clones were induced 72 hours after egg deposition with either 75 minute (MARCM) or 15 minute (FLP-out) 37 degrees C heatshock, and fixed 72 hours later. Tester stocks were:NoneNoneNoneNone2R MARCM stock:y,w, hsFLP, UAS-CD8GFP ; FRT42D, tub-gal80 ; tub-gal4 / TM6B3R MARCM stock:y,w, hsFLP, UAS-CD8GFP ; ; tub-gal4, FRT82B, tub-gal80 / TM6BFLP-out clone stock: less than italic greater than y,w, hsFLP ; ; act greater than CD2 greater than gal4, UASGFPnls less than /italic greater than FLP-out stock: less than italic greater than hsFLP, UASGFPnls ; + / SM5-TM6 / tub greater than gal80 greater than gal4 less than /italic greater than Immunostaining was performed as previously describedNone. Ovarian follicle cell clones were induced with 15 minute heatshock of young mated female adults and fixed 72 hours laterNone. Antibodies used were Chicken anti-GFP (1/1000, Abcam), Rabbit anti-Mei-P26 (1/1000)None, mouse anti-Ago1 1B8 (1/1000) (gift from Haruhiko Siomi), Rabbit anti-GW182 (1/500) (this study), Rabbit anti-Gal4 DBD (1/150, Santa Cruz sc-577). To genotype thedcr-2alleles, the following allele-specific PCR primers were used: dcr2[L811X] test F_CAGTCAACAAGGCCGATAAGAGC and dcr2 [L811] wt ASO R_ACAAAGAACGGATGCCAAATCTTC for the wildtypedcr-2allele; dcr2 [L811X] ASO_ATGGTATTCCGCGATATCTTTGG and dcr2[L811X] test R_CACCTTTGTGACCAGCATGGG for thedcr-2[L811fsx]allele. We depleted small RNA factors from S2R+ cells by soaking with double stranded RNA as describedNone, using previously validated templatesNone. All soaking experiments are the result of 2 rounds of RNAi soaking for 4 days each. 4 days after the first dsRNA soaking, total cell number was re-normalized before performing the second round of soaking. For S2 cell western blots, we used Rabbit anti-AGO1 (1/1000, Abcam ab5070) and mouse anti-alpha Tubulin (1/1000). To quantify proteins, signals generated by the ECL reagent were captured by Fujifilm LAS-3000 Imager using non-saturating exposures. Intensity of individual bands on the blots was measured by ImageGauge under the "Quant" mode. alpha-tubulin was used as loading control to normalize the amount of individual samples. For qRT-PCR analysis ofAGO1transcript levels, we used these primer sets: AGO1-2678+ (5'-TGTGGGACGACAATCACTTT-3'), AGO1-2807- (5'-CAGATGATATCTGGCACGGA-3'), AGO1-1015+ (5'-GTCATTGACTTCATGTGCGA-3'), AGO1-1195- (5'-AGTGGGAATGATTGCATCTG-3'). For miRNA and siRNA transfection experiments, 100 pmole of 5' phosphorylated miR-276a/star duplex or scrambled siRNA were transfected into S2 cells, 7 days after dsRNA soaking. The RNA was harvested 24 hours after transfection. For luciferase assays, a psiCHECK plasmid bearing two perfect sites for miR-276a downstream of a Renilla luciferase gene (25ng per well) were co-transfected with ub-Gal4 (12.5ng/well) and either pUAS-DsRed-mir-276a (25ng/well) or miR-276a duplex (15.6pmole per well) for 72 h in 96-well plates. Luciferase activities were measured with the Dual-Glo Luciferase Assay System (Promega). Dicer-expressing plasmid (pCK-FLAG-Dicer) was a gift of Dr. V. Narry Kim (Seoul National University, Korea). The scrambled siRNA control was purchased from IDT. The miRNA-expressing and control constructs (tRNA[lys], tRNA-mir-451, tRNA-mir-451cm, and tRNA-mir-155) were cloned into pCR2.1-TOPO vector (Life Technologies) as previously describedNone. Oligo sequences for miRNA cloning were:NoneNoneNoneNoneNonetRNAlys3_F GcccggatagctcagtcggtagagcaTcagactttTaatctgagggtccagggtTcaagtccctgtRNAlys3_R gaggaaaaaaaagatacCGCCCGAAcagggacttgAaccctRNAlys3_451wt_R AAAAACCATTACCATTACTAAACTCAGTAATGGTAACGGTTTCGCCCGAACAGGGACTTGAACCCtRNAlys3_451cm_R AAAAACCATTAaaATTACTAAACTCAGTAATGGTAACGGTTTCGCCCGAACAGGGACTTGAACCCtRNAlys3_mir155_R AAAAATGTTAATGCTAATATGTAGGAGTCAGTTGGAGGCAAAAACCCCTATCACGATTAGCATTAACGCCCGAACAGGGACTTGAACCCDicer-/-mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) and human 293T cells were maintained in DMEM, high glucose, GlutaMAX with 10% heat-inactivated FBS (Sigma) and 1% Penicillin-Streptomycin (Life Technologies) and incubated in a humidified 37 degrees C/5% CO2 incubator. Lipofectamine 2000 (Life Technologies) was used to transfect cells according to the manufacturer's manual. To study mAgo2 stability, 50 ug/ml cycloheximide (CHX, Calbiochem) was added toDicer-/-MEFs 24 h after transfection. The cells were harvested at 5 h and 10-12 h after CHX addition. To inhibit proteasome activity, cells were treated with both CHX (25 ug/ml) and MG132 (25 uM) or DMSO for 5 and 10 h. To inhibit autophagy pathway activity, cells were co-treated with CHX (25 ug/ml) and DMSO or Bafilomycin A1 (100 nM) for 4 and 8 h. Total proteins were obtained by lysing the cells with IP/Extract buffer (20mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150mM NaCl, 2mM MgCl2, 5% Glycerol, 5% NP-40, 2mM DTT). The following antibodies were used in Western blotting: anti-mAgo2 (MA2, 1:5000; a kind gift from Dr. Donal O'Carroll, EMBL); anti-alpha-tubulin (1:1000); anti-HA (F-7, 1:000, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc). Western signals were quantified as described above. Total RNA was extracted by Trizol reagent (Life Technologies), and the resulting RNA was subjected to qRT-PCR analysis and Northern blotting. We performed three replicate qRT-PCR assays with the following primer sets: qmmu-Ago2_F (5'-AGTTCCAGCAGGTTCTCCAC-3'), qmmu-Ago2_R (5'-ATGTTCCCACTCTTCCCAAC-3'), qmmu-GAPDH_F (5'-TGTGTCCGTCGTGGATCTGA-3'), qmmu-GAPDH_R (5'-CCTGCTTCACCACCTTCTTGA-3'). For Northern blotting, RNA samples were separated on 20% urea polyacrylamide denaturing gels (National Diagnostics), transferred to GeneScreen Plus (Perkin Elmer), and probed with gamma-32P-labeled DNA oligonucleotides antisense to the miRNAs of interest at 45 degrees C overnight. The membranes were washed with 2X SSC/0.1% SDS at 45 degrees C for 4 times for 15 min each, then exposed to an imaging plate (Fujifilm). The sequences of probes used in our studies are: miR-155 (5'-ACCCCTATCACGATTAGCATTAA-3'), miR-451 (5'-AACTCAGTAATGGTAACGGTTT-3'), let-7 (5'-ACTATACAACCTACTACCTCA-3'). To analyze mAgo2-associated RNA, cell lysates were cleared and then incubated with mouse mAgo2 antibody (2D4, Wako)-conjugated Dynabeads Protein G (Invitrogen). The mAgo2-associated RNA was extracted with phenol/chloroform/isoamyl alcohol (25:24:1), followed by ethanol precipitation at -20 degrees C overnight. The RNA was resuspended in 15ul water, divided into half, and subjected to Northern blotting or a total labeling experiment. To label total RNA associated to mAgo2, RNA samples were first 5' dephosphorylated with antarctic phosphatase (NEB) in the presence of 20 units of RNaseOUT (Life Technology) at 37 degrees C for 1 h. The antarctic phosphatase was inactivated at 70 degrees C for 10 min. The resulting RNA samples were then 5' phosphorylated with gamma-32P-ATP by PNK (NEB) in the presence of 20 units of RNaseOUT at 37 degrees C for 1 h. The unincorporated gamma-32P-ATP was removed by Illustra MicroSpin G-25 Columns (GE Healthcare Life Sciences), and half of the samples were loaded onto 20% urea polyacrylamide denaturing gels with 2* Gel Loading Buffer II (Ambion). The signals were exposed to an imaging plate for 10 min.