The transition from a vegetative to reproductive phase of development in flowering plants is tightly regulated by a complex network of control mechanisms that sense environmental signals (Andres and Coupland, 2012). InArabidopsis thaliana, four major pathways containing hundreds of genes have been identified - the autonomous, photoperiod, gibberellic acid, and vernalization pathways. A smaller number of genes function as floral integrators and respond to these multiple pathways to regulate the transition to flowering. The difference between late and early flowering varieties ofArabidopsisis partly due to natural allelic variation in two genes with winter annual plants having active alleles ofFLOWERING LOCUS C(FLC) andFRIGIDA(FRI) (Clarke and Dean, 1994;KoornneefNone, 1994;LeeNone, 1994a;Lee and Amasino, 1995;GazzaniNone, 2003;ShindoNone, 2006). FLCis a MADS-box transcription factor which delays flowering by repressing the expression of the floral integratorsSUPRESSOR OF OVER-EXPRESSION OF CO(SOC1) (LeeNone, 2000;OnouchiNone, 2000), the RAF kinase inhibitor-like/phosphatidylethanolamine binding family encoding geneFLOWERING LOCUS T(FT) and the bZIP transcription factorFD(KardailskyNone, 1999;KobayashiNone, 1999;SearleNone, 2006). FLCexpression is determined by the RNA Polymerase associated complex (Paf1C) and the coil-coil proteinFRIvia interactions withSUPPRESSOR OF FRIGIDA4(SUF4),FRIGIDA-LIKE1(FRL1) andFRIGIDA ESSENTIAL1(FES1) (MichaelsNone, 2004;SchmitzNone, 2005;Kim and Michaels, 2006;KimNone, 2006). The core polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) is associated withFLCchromatin prior to, during and after a cold exposure (De LuciaNone, 2008). Vernalization accelerates flowering through stable repression ofFLCthrough the increased transcription of the antisenseFLCtranscriptCOOLAIR(SwiezewskiNone, 2009) and the non-codingCOLDAIRsense transcript from a cryptic promoter with the first intron ofFLC, with COLDAIR thought to recruit the PHD proteins VNR5, VIN3, and VEL1 to form a complex with PRC2 (to produce the PHD-PRC2 complex) at theFLClocus (Sung and Amasino, 2004;SungNone, 2006b;GrebNone, 2007;De LuciaNone, 2008;Heo and Sung, 2011). These proteins induce the trimethylation of lysine 27 of histone 3 (H3K27me3) that maintainFLCin a repressed state upon the return to warm conditions (BastowNone, 2004). Once the vernalized state is established, it is subsequently epigenetically maintained by the activity ofVERNALIZATION 1(VRN1) (LevyNone, 2002) andLIKE-HETEROCHROMATIN PROTEIN 1(LHP1) (MylneNone, 2006;SungNone, 2006a). AlthoughFLCis the primary regulator of flowering in response to vernalization in winter-annual varieties ofArabidopsis, analysis offlcnull mutants has demonstrated that anFLC-independent pathway also exists (Michaels and Amasino, 2001;Sung and Amasino, 2004;Alexandre and Hennig, 2008). Two MADS-box genes promote flowering in response to vernalization independently ofFLC;AGAMOUS-LIKE 19(AGL19) (SchonrockNone, 2006) andAGAMOUS-LIKE 24(AGL24) (MichaelsNone, 2003a). Similarly toFLC,AGL19is maintained in a transcriptionally repressed state by polycomb proteins (SchonrockNone, 2006) and this repression is alleviated by vernalization via a mechanism requiringVIN3, but which is independent ofVRN2(SchonrockNone, 2006). Once activated,AGL19expression induces flowering by upregulatingLFYandAPETALA11, but notSOC1(SchonrockNone, 2006). In contrast,AGL24has a complex interaction withSOC1, as both genes are able to positively regulate the expression of the other, and overexpression of one without the other has a minimal effect (MichaelsNone, 2003a). LikeAGL19,AGL24is thought to promote flowering by upregulatingLFY(YuNone, 2002). When released from FLC repression, the FT protein is transported from the leaves to the shoot apical meristem where it interacts with the bZIP transcription factor FD (AnNone, 2004;AbeNone, 2005;WiggeNone, 2005;CorbesierNone, 2007;IkedaNone, 2007). In rice, this interaction is mediated by the 14-3-3 GF14c protein (TaokaNone, 2011), which forms a hexameric florigen activation complex (FAC), composed of two molecules each of Hd3a (the rice FT orthologue), FD, and GF14c (TaokaNone, 2011). In this model, FD anchors the FAC to regulatory regions of FAC target genes through the bZip DNA binding domain of FD. Consistent with this model, similar pairwise interactions have been described in tomato (PnueliNone, 2001). InArabidopsis, FD binds the promoters of severalSQUAMOSA PROMOTER BINDING PROTEIN LIKE(SPL) genes, includingSPL3,SPL4,SPL5, andSOC1(Teper-Bamnolker and Samach, 2005;JungNone, 2012). SOC1 also binds the promoters ofSPL3,SPL4, andSPL5(JungNone, 2012), and SPL3, SPL4, and SPL5 can directly activateLFYexpression (YamaguchiNone, 2009;JungNone, 2012). FD also, probably indirectly, activatesAP1expression (AbeNone, 2005;WiggeNone, 2005;BenllochNone, 2011). The TERMINAL FLOWER 1 (TFL) protein, an FT paralogue with opposite function, normally represses flowering perhaps by competing with FT for binding to FD or the FAC (HanzawaNone, 2005;AhnNone, 2006). Although several studies have investigated natural variation in vernalization response inArabidopsis, several of these studies have revealed variation atFRI,FLC, or loci interacting with these loci accounted for much of the observed variation (ShindoNone, 2006;StrangeNone, 2011;CousthamNone, 2012;Sanchez-BermejoNone, 2012). While some additional loci have been identified (Sanchez-BermejoNone, 2012), little is known about the identity or function of other loci or how these loci function in the context of existing vernalization pathways. One such locusFLOWERING H(FLH) was identified in recombinant inbred lines (RILs) derived from crosses of the Landsbergerecta(Ler) accession with the Cape Verdi Islands (CVI) accession (Alonso-BlancoNone, 1998). Plants carrying CVI alleles ofFLHflower earlier than Ler, particularly after vernalization, but responded similarly to photoperiod (Alonso-BlancoNone, 1998). This study further characterizes theFLHflowering time locus and shows thatFLHis likely to represent a novel flowering time gene. Furthermore, the ability of CVI alleles ofFLHto confer early flowering after vernalization operates in parallel to the PHD-PRC2 mediated repression ofFLC. This study also demonstrates that the earliness conferred by CVI alleles ofFLHis dependent on the presence of FD, but does not require FT, suggesting that FLH may act as a modifier of the FD-specific activity of the FAC. Seeds of Landsbergerecta(Ler,NW20),ft-1andfd-1(KoornneefNone, 1991),ap1-1(MandelNone, 1992), andap1-1/cal1-1(DittaNone, 2004), all in the Lerbackground, were obtained from theArabidopsisBiological Resource Collection (ABRC, Columbus, Ohio, USA). Seeds of near-isogenic line 1 (NIL1) containing the CVI allele atFLH(Alonso-BlancoNone, 1998) were provided by C. Alonso-Blanco. Seeds offlc-5,vrn5-1,vin3-7(GrebNone, 2007), andvrn1-2(LevyNone, 2002) in the Lerbackground were provided by C. Dean. Seeds ofsoc1-2in Ler(MelzerNone, 2008) were provided by G. Coupland. Seeds were sown on moist soil (Debco seed raising mix/vermiculite, 4:1) before being vernalized in the dark for 3 weeks in the dark at 4 degrees C and then transferred to a controlled-environment growth room at 22 degrees C under an 8/16 light/dark regime (short day condition, SD) with cool white fluorescent light (Sylvania Luxline Plus F36W/840). Control, non-vernalized plants were stratified at in the dark at 4 degrees C for 2 days prior to transfer to SD or long day (LD) conditions. For plants grown in LD, the photoperiod was 16/8 light/dark under the same illumination conditions. Plant were grown for 21 days (SD) or 7 days (LD) before being transferred to individual wells of a 48-well tray. Flowering time was measured by counting the total number of rosette leaves and cauline leaves present on the main stem. TheFLHgene was initially mapped by genotyping F2 plants from a cross of LerandFLH-CVI (NIL1). Genomic DNA was extracted from 648 plants according to the method described byKlimyukNone(1993), and plants with recombination events between the markers CER455033 (www.arabidopsis.org; last accessed 23 April 2013) and a CAPS marker derived from the AFLP marker SM78-320 marker (PetersNone, 2001) were selected. TheFLHgenotype of recombinant plants was determined by analysing the flowering time of 24-48 plants in the F3 generation. Subsequent fine mapping was performed using a selection of new markers (Supplementary Table S1, available atJXBonline) on high-quality genomic DNA extracted from recombinants according to the method byDellaportaNone(1983). Mutant alleles were detected as previously described forflc-5,vrn5-1(GrebNone, 2007), andvrn1-1(LevyNone, 2002) or using the markers described inSupplementary Table S2. For semi-quantitative reverse-transcription (RT)-PCR, whole seedlings were harvested at 10 days post germination or vernalization every 10 days for 40 days after being germinated on MS plates without sucrose. Total RNA was extracted from pooled seedlings at each stage with and without vernalization using the RNeasy Plant Kit (Qiagen) as per the manufacturer's instructions. The optional on-column DNAse step was also included. The yield and RNA purity was determined spectrophotometrically (NanoDrop ND-1000) and visualized by gel electrophoresis. cDNA was synthesized using Superscript III (Invitrogen) as per the manufacturer's instructions. Total RNA (500ng) was used per cDNA synthesis reaction in an Eppendorf Mastercycler. cDNA concentration across samples was normalized using ACTIN7 as an internal control and visualized on a 1% (w/v) agarose gel using ethidium bromide staining. The primer sequences are described inSupplementary Table S3. For quantitative RT (qRT) PCR, total RNA was extracted from material enriched in shoot apices (Lopez-JuezNone, 2008) collected from pools of 24 plants each ofFLH-CVIand Lergrown for at 15-20 short days post germination/vernalization (i.e. at the same developmental stage). Three biological replicates of each genotype and treatment were used. RNA was purified using the Qiagen RNeasy Kit as per the manufacturer's instructions. Total RNA (2 ug) was DNase treated with the Promega RQ1 DNase Kit as per the manufacturer's instructions to remove any genomic DNA contamination. Quantitative real-time PCR was performed using the Bio-RAD iCycler and the iScript One Step RT-PCR Kit with SYBR Green as per the manufacturer's instructions. PCR conditions consisted of a reverse-transcription step at 50 degrees C for 10 minutes, a reverse transcription inactivation step at 95 degrees C for 5 minutes, and 40 cycles of 95 degrees C for 10 seconds followed by 64.5 degrees C for 30 seconds. Results were visualized using the BioRad iQ5 Optical System Software. Expression ofFDandFTwas normalized relative to the expression ofUBC_21previously validated as a reference gene for qRT-PCR (CzechowskiNone, 2005). Details of qRT-PCR primers are described inSupplementary Table S4. Transcript abundance was calculated using the Pfaffl model for relative quantification with efficiency correction (Pfaffl, 2001), and statistical analysis was performed using a Student's t-test. The presence of the alleles atFLHoriginating from the CVI accession in an otherwise Lernear-isogenic line reduced flowering time when grown in a SD photoperiod, particularly in response to vernalization (Fig. 1A;Alonso-BlancoNone, 1998). FLH-CVI plants appeared otherwise normal and did not exhibit any additional other phenotypes associated with early flowering, and produced normal flowers and cauline leaves (Fig. 1A). In the absence of a vernalization treatment,FLH-CVI plants flowered with approximately five fewer leaves than Lerin SD conditions (Fig. 1B). CVI alleles ofFLHalso conferred slightly earlier flowering in LD conditions, withFLH-CVI plants flowering with approximately three fewer leaves in the absence of vernalization and with four fewer leaves than Lerafter a vernalization treatment (Fig. 1C). CVI alleles ofFLHaccelerate flowering compared to Leralleles. (A) Comparison of LerandFLH-CVI (NIL1) grown for 30 short days after 3 weeks of vernalization. (B, C) Flowering time of LerandFLH-CVI in short days (B) and long days (C) as measured by total leaf number in response to 3 weeks of vernalization at 4 degrees C (n= 48). Bars are standard errors. In order to further analyse the function ofFLHin response to vernalization, this study measured the flowering time ofFLH-CVI and Lerafter exposure to different durations of vernalization as measured by total leaf number after growth in SD conditions (Fig. 2). A vernalization response was detected in bothFLH-CVI and Lerafter 3-week vernalization, with vernalizedFLH-CVI plants flowering significantly earlier than Ler. Exposure to a longer vernalization treatment of 6 weeks did not lead to significantly earlier flowering, suggesting that saturation of the vernalization response occurs at or before 3 weeks in plants with a CVI allele ofFLH. Dosage sensitivity ofFLHalleles to increasing durations of vernalization. Flowering time of LerandFLH-CVI as measured by total leaf number in response to various durations of vernalization (n= 24). Bars are standard errors. In order to gain an understanding of whereFLHmay fit into the current model of floral induction inArabidopsis, semi-quantitative RT-PCR was performed on genes located throughout the vernalization-induced flowering pathway (FLC,AGL24, andAGL19), floral integrator genes (FT,FD,SOC1, andLFY), and the meristem identify geneAP1, all of which are known to be regulated either directly or indirectly by vernalization. The transcript levels of these genes were examined in LerandFLH-CVI plants every 10 days for 40 days in both control (non-vernalized) plants and in plants exposed to 3-week vernalization (Fig. 3). Transcript levels in vernalized and non-vernalized samples were then compared to identify those transcripts with altered abundance inFLH-CVI relative to Ler. After applying these criteria, onlyAP1appeared to show any significant change in abundance inFLH-CVI compared to Ler, relative to its levels when non-vernalized at the same stages of development. In theFLH-CVI early-flowering plant line,AP1transcript abundance was increased, particularly at 40 days of growth. This increase inAP1expression was not accompanied with an increase inSOC1,LFY,FT, orFDexpression, implying that CVI alleles ofFLHmay be capable of upregulatingAP1independently of these genes. The semi-quantitative RT-PCR data also implied thatFLHdoes not regulate any of the other vernalization-induced flowering time genes investigated, including the major repressorFLC. Semi-quantitative RT-PCR analysis of flowering time genes in the presence of CVI alleles ofFLH, showing transcript levels of flowering time genes in seedlings of Lerrelative toFLH-CVI at 10-day increments with and without vernalization. Days is days of growth in SD conditions post stratification or post vernalization. To further investigate the mechanism by which CVI alleles ofFLHconfer early flowering, combinations of CVI alleles ofFLHwith mutants in other flowering time genes were generated. In order to accurately determine which progeny of various crosses contained the CVI alleles ofFLH, this study sought to identify a molecular marker closely linked toFLH. This approach also allowed a more precise determination of the chromosomal location of theFLHlocus, as the first step towards cloning theFLHquantitative trait locus. TheFLHlocus was originally identified byAlonso-BlancoNone(1998) and further characterized in aFLH-CVI near-isogenic line derived from introgression of CVI alleles into Ler. TheFLH-CVI line contains an approximately 10 centimorgan region of CVI-derived DNA at the bottom of the long arm of chromosome 5 in a Lerbackground (Fig. 4A;Alonso-BlancoNone, 1998). The Ler-CVI polymorphic marker G2368 was previously used as a marker forFLHin theFLHNIL1. G2368 maps to 109 cM on the Ler-CVI genetic map (Alonso-BlancoNone, 1998) and is located at approximately 25.8Mb on chromosome 5 of the Columbia accession reference genome, close to theMAF2-MAF5genes (RatcliffeNone, 2003). NIL1 has previously been shown to contain Leralleles at EG7F2 (24.6Mb) and CVI alleles at markers T6B16 (24.8Mb) and MQB2 (25.2Mb) (SwarupNone, 1999) thus delimiting containingFLHto a region of approximately 2.4Mb between 24.6Mb and the end of chromosome 5 at 27.0Mb. Identification of markers that co-segregate withFLH. (A) Location of CVI-derived DNA on chromosome 5 in theFLH-CVI NIL is indicated by the filled area. (B) Segregation of flowering time in the F2 progeny of a cross between Lerand theFLH-CVI NIL (n= 48); filled triangles indicate the mean flowering time of each of the parents and horizontal lines indicate the range of flowering times (n greater than = 35). (C) Mapping ofFLH; filled triangles indicate the positions of markers used to mapFLH. Recombinants were identified in 648 F2 progeny of a cross between Lerand theFLH-CVI NIL. To determine the degree of linkage between G2368 andFLH, NIL1 was first crossed to Lerand the F2 progeny were analysed for flowering time, which confirmed that early flowering conferred by the CVI alleles ofFLHwas dominant (Fig. 4B). Plants carrying recombination events between markers CER455033 and PLOP3 were identified, and the F3 progeny were tested for segregation of late flowering, indicating that the F2 parent was homozygous for the Lerallele ofFLH. F2 plants with recombinants events between CER455033 and SM78-320 were then further analysed using additional polymorphic markers (Fig. 4C). In a population of 648 F2 plants, 11 recombinants between G2368 andFLHcould be detected. Furthermore,FLHco-segregated with the marker 2662, and thus the region containingFLHwas delimited by markers K1F13D and 2672. Therefore, marker 2662 was used for all further genotyping ofFLHalleles. Interestingly, a reduction in recombination was detected distal toFLH(i.e. towards the telomere), suggesting that recombination is suppressed in this region in the Ler* NIL1 cross. This rough mapping ofFLHalso suggests thatFLHis likely to represent a new flowering time locus, as only a single gene with a flowering time effect,DDM1, is localized to this region (JeddelohNone, 1999). However, it seems unlikely thatFLHis an allele ofDDM1, as mutations inDDM1, which encodes a SWI-SNF2-like protein, produces plants with exhibit unstable pleiotropic phenotypes that become progressively more severe with each generation (KakutaniNone, 1996) - phenotypes which are not shared with plants carrying CVI alleles ofFLH. In order to identify the role and interaction that CVI alleles ofFLHhave with known vernalization genes within the vernalization flowering time pathway, theFLH-CVI NIL1 was crossed with various mutants that regulateFLCexpression. In order to avoid any effects on flowering time due to mixing of genetic backgrounds, this study only used mutations that were in the Lergenetic background, which contains a weakly active allele ofFLC(KoornneefNone, 1994;LeeNone, 1994b;GazzaniNone, 2003;MichaelsNone, 2003b). F2 progeny were genotyped atFLHusing the 2662 marker, and F3 plants doubly homozygous for CVI alleles atFLHand the mutation of interest were subjected to flowering time analysis. Mutations inVIN3lead to late flowering, particularly after vernalization, as upregulation ofVIN3during the cold is required for the initial repression ofFLC(Sung and Amasino, 2004;GrebNone, 2007). vin3mutant plants were slightly late flowering in the absence of a vernalization treatment and were completely unresponsive to a vernalization response and subsequent growth in SD conditions (Fig. 5AandB). When CVI alleles ofFLHwere combined with avin3mutation, the resultingFLH-CVIvin3plants flowered earlier than thevin3mutant but later thanFLH-CVI plants and did not respond to vernalization, suggesting that the earliness conferred by CVI alleles ofFLHdoes not require VIN3 activity. Combinations of CVI alleles ofFLHwith mutations in VRN5, which forms a dimer with VIN3, behaved similarly. FLH-CVIvrn5plants flowered earlier thanvrn5mutants, but not as early asFLH-CVI plants, andFLH-CVIvrn5plants retained a weak response to vernalization (Fig. 5AandB). FLH-CVIvrn1plants flowered almost as early asFLH-CVI plants, but did not exhibit a vernalization response (Fig. 5AandB). Genetic analysis ofFLH-CVI interaction with vernalization pathway genes. (A) Vernalized wildtype Ler,flc-5,vrn5-1,vin3-7, andvrn1-2mutants andFLH-CVI combinations grown in for 21 short days after 3-week vernalization. (B) Comparison of flowering time between vernalized treatments of wild-type Ler,FLH-CVI, various known vernalization mutantsflc-5,vin5-1,vin3-7, andvrn1-2, and FLH-CVI in the mutant backgrounds grown in short days (n greater than = 48). (C) Comparison of flowering time between vernalized treatments of wild-type Columbia and Ler,FLH-CVI, andFLH-CVI introgressed into Col (FLH-CVI in Col) grown in short days (n greater than = 48). Bars are standard errors. To determine if there is an interaction between CVI alleles ofFLHand active alleles ofFLC, the CVI allele ofFLHwas introgressed into Columbia and selected plants with CVI alleles atFLHusing the molecular marker 2662. CVI alleles ofFLHwere able to confer earlier flowering, particularly after vernalization in the Columbia background; however, the flowering time was more similar to Columbia (Fig. 5C). This suggests that CVI alleles ofFLHconfer earlier flowering than Col alleles ofFLHand that CVI alleles of FLH are not able to completely overcome the lateness caused by active alleles ofFLC. To establish how CVI alleles ofFLHmay be effecting the transcript levels ofAP1through the activitivy of floral integrators, CVI alleles ofFLHwere introduced by crossing into floral integrator mutants in a Lerbackground. Combinations of CVI alleles of FLH withap1andap1/calmutations produced plants with a flowering time that was intermediate between the two parents, suggesting FLH is able to promote flowering partially independently ofAP1andCAL(Fig. 6BandC). When CVI alleles ofFLHwere combined with mutations insoc1, the resultingFLH-CVIsoc1plants were slightly earlier flowering thansoc1plants (Fig. 6B), suggesting that the earlinesss conferred by CVI allels ofFLHis partially dependent on, or acts additively with,SOC1. Genetic analysis of the interaction ofFLH-CVI with floral integrator genes. (A) Vernalized wildtype Ler,FLH-CVI,fd-1,ft-1, andFLH-CVI combinations grown in short days for 30 days after 3-week vernalization. (B) Comparison of flowering time between vernalized treatments of wild-type Ler,FLH-CVI, and various mutants andFLH-CVI combinations grown in SD conditions (n greater than = 48). (C) Comparison of flowering time between vernalized treatments of wild-type Ler,FLH-CVI, and various mutants andFLH-CVI combinations grown in LD conditions (n greater than = 48). Bars are standard errors. The most striking results were observed when CVI alleles ofFLHwere combined with mutations inFDandFT. FLH-CVIftplants flowered with an average of 13 fewer leaves compared to theftsingle mutant control in both vernalized and non-vernalized treatments (Fig. 6), which was similar to the number of leaves in wildtype Lerplants. CVI alleles ofFLHwere thus able to completely overcome the loss ofFTand to restore flowering time comparable to that of wild type Ler. However,FLH-CVIftplants did not flower as early asFLH-CVI plants, suggesting that the ability ofFLHto accelerate flowering is partially dependent onFT. In contrast, CVI alleles ofFLHwere unable to overcome the late flowering due to the loss ofFD,in both non-vernalized and vernalized treatments. FLH-CVIfdplants exhibiting a flowering time similar to that of thefdsingle mutant in both treatments, suggesting thatfdmutations are completely epistatic to CVI alleles ofFLH(Fig. 6AandB). This suggests that the ability of CVI alleles ofFLHto accelerate flowering is completely dependent onFDactivity. To determine if CVI alleles ofFLHcan accelerate flowering when the photoperiod pathway is active, the flowering time measurements were repeated using plants grown in LD conditions. CVI alleles ofFLHbehaved similarly in combination with most mutations in long days as they did in short days. Mutations inap1andfdprevented the vernalization response of CVI alleles ofFLH(Fig. 6C), and mutation ofsoc1reduced the ability of CVI alleles of FLH to confer earliness. As the results of the genetic analysis suggested thatFLHrequiresFDto confer early flowering, this study examined the possibility that CVI alleles ofFLHmay lead to the increased expression ofFDin the shoot meristem. Therefore, material enriched in shoot apices were collected from LerandFLH-CVI plants grown in SD conditions andFDexpression was examined by qRT-PCR (Fig. 7A). Consistent with previous reports, the levels ofFDexpression was higher in plants that had been vernalized (Searle and Coupland, 2004). FDmRNA levels were slightly elevated (by approximately 2-fold) inFLH-CVI apices compared to Lerplants in non-vernalized control plants, butFDexpression was not different between vernalized LerandFLH-CVI plants. This suggests that CVI alleles ofFLHcan increaseFDexpression under some conditions. Consistent with the genetic analysis, no substantial differences inFTexpression betweenFLH-CVI and Lerplants were detected (Fig. 7B). FTandFDexpression inFLH-CVI. Expression ofFD(A) andFT(B) in shoot apical meristem-enriched tissues, as measured by quantitative RT-PCR relative to the internal controlUBC. Data are means and standard errors of three biological replicates. Different letters indicate significant differences in relative expression levels (P less than = 0.05). Natural variation in vernalization responses inArabidopsishas been investigated using a variety of approaches, and several QTLs have been identified (LempeNone, 2005;Sanchez-BermejoNone, 2012). In some cases, genes responsible for these QTLs have also been identified (ShindoNone, 2006). This study characterized the activity of theFLOWERING Hlocus and demonstrated that alleles from the Cape Verde Islands accession accelerate flowering in anFD-dependent manner. FLHwas identified in the Ler/CVI recombinant inbred line population, as a locus which conferred early flowering, particularly in response to vernalization, with CVI alleles atFLHconferring early flowering compared to Leralleles (Alonso-BlancoNone, 1998). This suggests that the CVI allele ofFLHmay be a gain-of-function polymorphism, or that the Lerallele ofFLHmay represent a loss-of-function allele. The direct comparison of CVI and Columbia alleles ofFLH(Fig. 5) revealed that Columbia appeared to have a similar allele ofFLHas Ler, as plants with CVI alleles ofFLHwere earlier flowering than those with Col alleles. Flowering time analysis of RILs derived from crosses of Lerto Col did not identify a flowering time QTL at theFLHlocus, suggesting that Lerand Col have similarFLHalleles (JansenNone, 1995). The present analysis of CVI alleles ofFLHintrogressed into Columbia is also consistent with a previous QTL analysis performed on a Col * CVI RIL population when a weak flowering time QTL was detected close toFLHin the Col * CVI RIL, with Columbia alleles conferring later flowering than CVI alleles (SimonNone, 2008). This situation is similar to that observed in an analysis of natural variation ofCRYPTOCHROME 2(CRY2). The allele ofCRY2present in CVI was identified as the underlying cause of theEARLY DAYLENGTH INSENSITIVE(EDI) QTL in the Ler/CVI RIL population (Alonso-BlancoNone, 1998;El-Din El-AssalNone, 2001). CRY2-CVI confers dominant, day-length-insensitive early flowering due to the increased accumulation ofCRY2-CVI (El-Din El-AssalNone, 2001). Although the CVI allele ofCRY2appears to be unique, and other functional variants inCRY2have not been described, this example highlights the use of natural variation to uncover novel alleles that shed light on gene function. Similarly, identification of natural variation in an advanced multiparent population uncovered a previously unknown function in the control of short architecture for theAGAMOUS-LIKE6gene (HuangNone, 2012). As several genes are located close to the previously reported location ofFLH, it was important to be able to exclude these genes asFLH. The fine mapping ofFLHconfirms thatFLHis not a novel allele ofMAF2,MAF3,MAF4, orMAF5, which lie close toFLH. MAF2is involved in vernalization response (RatcliffeNone, 2003) and natural variation inMAF2andMAF3has been described (RosloskiNone, 2010). OneFLHcandidate with a role in flowering time that could not be eliminated by fine mapping has been described, the SWI/SNF2-like proteinDECREASED DNA METHYLATION(DDM1) (JeddelohNone, 1999). The role ofDDM1in maintenance of 'global' chromatin methylation is also not consistent with the subtle effect ofFLHon flowering time. ddm1mutants exhibit pleiotropic defects and are unstable (JeddelohNone, 1999), phenotypes that are not observed in multiple generations of crosses and propagation of theFLH-CVI NIL. Furthermore, preliminary sequence analysis does not support the hypothesis thatFLHisDDM1(A. Dinsdale, unpublished). CVI alleles ofFLHdid not affect the expression of any of the tested genes differently compared to Leralleles ofFLH, exceptAP1andFD. This suggests thatFLHmay be acting very late in a floral promoting pathway to activate transcription or is acting post-transcriptionally. CVI alleles ofFLHcan still accelerate flowering in the absence ofAP1, particularly in short days, suggesting at least a partial independence fromAP1. The observation that CVI alleles ofFLHdo not affect the expression ofFT, and only weakly increaseFDexpression in the absence of vernalization, suggests that the CVI allele ofFLHmay act as a weak transcriptional activator ofFDexpression. One flowering time gene with a similar phenotype toFLH-CVI isTERMINAL FLOWER1(TFL1) (Shannon and Meeks-Wagner, 1991;AlvarezNone, 1992). TheFLH-CVI phenotype is similar to that conferred by the overexpression of a TFL1-VP16 fusion protein, in which the TFL repressor is converted to a strong transcriptional activator. The early flowering of 35S::TFL-VP16 is strongly dependent onFD(Hanano and Goto, 2011), similar to that observed with CVI alleles ofFLH. Furthermore, the early floweringtflmutant phenotype is suppressed by afdmutation, similarly to the phenotype observed in theFLH-CVIfdplants. The dominance and activity of CVI alleles ofFLHhas some similarity to that ofFWA, but dominant late flowering alleles ofFWAare due to the misexpression ofFWA(SoppeNone, 2000), which interacts with FT, and FWA may therefore be competing for the FT-binding site on the 14-3-3 molecule in the FAC (IkedaNone, 2007). Taken together, this suggests several models forFLHactivity. CVI alleles ofFLHmay increase the expression or widen the expression domain ofFD, resulting in earlier flowering. However, the increase inFDexpression inFLH-CVI plants is subtle and only occurs prior to vernalization. In wild-type plants,FDexpression dramatically increases by approximately 10-fold in the shoot apex upon the transition to flowering (WiggeNone, 2005), so it seems unlikely that the small increase inFDexpression observed inFLH-CVI plants could entirely account for the observed earliness. Alternatively, CVI alleles ofFLHmay result in the misexpression, either by expression in a wider range of cells or by increased levels of expression, of a protein that can interact and cooperate directly with FD, perhaps as a transcriptional co-activator as part of the FAC. Alternatively, the protein encoded by CVI alleles ofFLHmay itself interact with the FAC, with FLH proteins encoded by the Lerand Columbia alleles ofFLHmay be unable to bind to the FAC or may bind at reduced affinity compared to theFLHprotein encoded by CVI alleles. The ability of CVI alleles ofFLHto rescue the late flowering offtmutants also supports the notion that FLH may be able to substitute for FT as part of the FAC. However, none of the predicted genes in theFLHregion of the genome encodes anFT-orTFL-like protein suggesting that if FLH does interact with the FAC, it may represent a novel interaction. Supplementary data are available atJXBonline. Supplementary Table S1. Mapping primersSupplementary Table S2. Genotyping primersSupplementary Table S3. Semi-quantitative RT-PCR primersSupplementary Table S4. Quantitative RT-PCR primers