Elafin, an endogenous serine protease inhibitor, is an important component of the epithelial shield against excessive neutrophil elastase (NE) activity (1). NE, a potent serine protease, is normally synthesized in the bone marrow and sequestered within the azurophilic granules of neutrophils. The major physiological function of NE is the intracellular destruction of pathogens following phagocytosis at sites of infection (2). Activated neutrophils also secrete NE into the extracellular environment. In this context, NE has important roles in the antimicrobial, inflammatory, and wound healing responses. Under normal physiological conditions, serine protease inhibitors, including elafin, rapidly quench NE activity, contributing to the resolution of inflammation and preserving tissue integrity (3). Imbalance between NE and its inhibitors is implicated in the pathogenesis of a wide range of diseases characterized by excessive or chronic inflammation (4). Elafin downregulation was observed in several inflammatory diseases, including acute respiratory distress syndrome (5), inflammatory bowel disease (6), and acute lung injury (7). In these studies, elafin downregulation correlates with increased NE activity and disease progression. In mouse models, constitutive elafin overexpression protected against acute lung injury (8), reduced pulmonary hypertension following chronic hypoxia (9), diminished tissue destruction associated with experimental colitis (6), and improved heart function after viral myocarditis (10) or myocardial infarction (11). The available evidence supports an important role for elafin in suppressing NE-activity and mitigating the pathogenesis of inflammatory disease. Several studies suggest that loss of elafin-mediated control of NE activity is a feature of malignant growth. Elafin downregulation was observed in poorly-differentiated compared to well-differentiated squamous cell carcinomas (12,13). Elafin expression is lost in melanoma and breast cancer cell lines compared to normal melanocytes and human mammary epithelial cells (HMECs) (14,15). The transcription factor C/EBPbeta is required for elafin expression in HMECs. Accumulation of a truncated, dominant-negative isoform of C/EBPbeta accounts for elafin downregulation in breast cancer cell lines (16). We previously reported that ectopic expression of elafin induced apoptosis in Rb negative and growth arrest in Rb-positive breast cancer cell lines (17), suggesting that elafin has tumor suppressive properties in the context of breast cancer. In the present study, we initially sought to understand the normal regulation and role of endogenously expressed elafin in HMECs, as well as the consequence of elafin downregulation on critical aspects of tumorigenesis. We observed dramatic upregulation of elafin in quiescence (G0) HMECs, leading us to hypothesize that elafin is a critical counterbalance against the mitogenic effects of NE. Using HMECs as a model system, the results support a role for elafin in opposing the NE-induced proliferation. We observed dramatic downregulation of elafin expression in patient-derived breast tumor specimens compared to elafin expression in the normal mammary epithelium, suggesting compromised control of NE-activity is indeed a feature of breast tumorigenesis. Finally, we investigated the implications of deregulated NE-activity on tumor growth in the C3(1)TAg mouse model of mammary tumorigenesis. In this model, NE knockout significantly reduced tumor growth and proliferation. A therapeutic approach designed to restore appropriate control of NE-activity may lead to the inhibition of tumor growth in breast cancer patients. Primary (i.e mortal) 81N, 70N, and 76N HMECs were cultured under growth factor-deficient conditions and harvested at 6-hour intervals for 48 hours to examine the expression of endogenous elafin during growth arrest. DNA content analysis revealed that HMECs were progressively arrested in G0/G1 phase. Complete arrest was observed between 24 and 36 hours of continuous culture (Figure 1A). Western blot analysis showed dramatic upregulation of elafin over the growth factor deprivation time course (Figure 1B), corresponding to the accumulation of HMECs in G0/G1 phase. Immunofluorescence analysis of Ki67, which is specifically downregulated in quiescent (G0) cells (18), confirms that growth factor deprivation induces G0 (and not G1) arrest in HMECs (Figure 1C). Elafin immunofluorescence demonstrates increased cytoplasmic staining intensity following growth factor deprivation (Figure 1D). Elafin has primarily been characterized as a secreted protein; therefore we next examined elafin levels in conditioned media by ELISA. The concentration of elafin in the conditioned media of 81N, 70N, and 76N HMECs cultured in the presence of growth factors for 24 hours was 2.6-2.9 ng/mL. Significantly higher concentrations of elafin were observed in HMECs cultured in growth factor-deprived medium: 4.0-6.3 ng/mL at 24 hours and 7.1-11.5 ng/mL at 48 hours (Figure 1E). Quantitative RT-PCR (qPCR) analysis revealed that elafin is highly induced at the mRNA level under growth factor deprivation conditions, increasing 12- to 178-fold at 24 hours and 165- to 240-fold at 48 hours compared to the level of elafin mRNA in HMECs cultured in growth factor-containing medium (Figure 1F). Previously, we reported that accumulation of a truncated, dominant negative isoform of C/EBPbeta represses elafin expression in breast cancer cell lines (16). We next interrogated if C/EBPbeta elements in the elafin promoter are necessary for elafin upregulation in G0 HMECs by luciferase reporter analysis of the elafin promoter. The results revealed that elafin upregulation in HMECs was dependent on C/EBPbeta sites 4 and 5, which we previously identified (16) (Figure S1A). Lastly, in the immortalized HMECs 76NF2V, knockdown of C/EBPbeta (Figure S1B) prevented elafin upregulation following growth factor deprivation (Figure S1C). To determine if Rb-dependent G0-arrest is required for elafin expression, we examined a panel of immortalized HMECs (19) that express both p53 and Rb (76NF2V), lack p53 (76NE6), or lack Rb and related pocket proteins (76NE7). Growth factor deprivation (GFD) for 48 hours resulted in the downregulation of Ki67 in 76NE6 and 76NF2V cells but not 76NE7 cells (Figure 2A). Maintenance of Ki67 expression in growth factor-deprived 76NE7 cells confirmed that loss of the Rb checkpoint eliminates the ability of HMECs to arrest in G0. 76NE6 and 76NF2V progressively arrested in G0/G1 over the 48-hour GFD time course and upregulated elafin (Figure S2, A and B), similar to primary HMECs (Figure 1, A and B). 76NE7 cells were incapable of elafin upregulation compared to 76NE6 and 76NF2V cells (Figure 2B) and they arrested in the G2-phase (not G1 phase) of the cell cycle over the 48-hour GFD time-course (Figure S2A). Furthermore, immortalized HMECs asynchronously proliferating or arrested in the G1-phase following treatment with lovastatin, S-phase following treatment with aphidicolin, or G2/M phase following treatment with nocodazole were unable to upregulate elafin compared to growth factor deprived, G0-arrested 76NE6 and 76NF2V; Rb-deficient 76NE7 cells were unable to upregulate elafin in response to any of the conditions examined (Figure 2C). Similar results were obtained using the immortalized 81N HMEC system; Rb-deficient 81NE7 HMECs accumulated in the G2 phase of the cell cycle (Figure S2C) and cannot upregulate elafin (Figure S2D) following GFD, compared to Rb-expressing 81NE6 and parental 81N HMECs. Furthermore, Rb knockdown renders 76NF2V and 76NE6 incapable of arrest in G0/G1 phase (Figure 2D) and elafin upregulation (Figure 2E) following GFD. Taken together, these results demonstrated that Rb-dependent G0 arrest is required for elafin upregulation in growth factor deprived HMECs, suggesting a role for elafin in growth control. To examine the role of elafin in maintenance of G0 arrest, elafin was knocked-down in 76NE6 (Figure 3A) and 81NE6 (Figure S3A) HMECs and the kinetics of cell proliferation were assessed under growth factor-deficient conditions (Figure 3B). Since FBS contains an abundance of serine protease inhibitors, cells were cultured in media lacking supplemental FBS. Both 76NE6 and 81NE6 elafin-knockdown cell lines exhibited modest but significant growth factor-independent proliferation with doubling times between 66 and 81 hours, while control cells exhibited complete growth cessation after only 24 hours in growth factor-depleted medium (Figure 3C). To verify the specificity of elafin knockdown and examine the importance of elafin-mediated protease inhibition in this system, we complemented 76NE6 elafin-knockdown cells with wild-type elafin (sensitive to shRNA downregulation), shRNA-resistant-elafin, and shRNA-resistant-M25G-elafin (the M25G mutation inactivates the protease inhibitor domain) (20) (Figures 3DandS3B). Elafin-knockdown 76NE6 cells demonstrated an approximate doubling in cell number compared to controls following 144 hours of growth factor deprivation (Figure 3E). Complementation of elafin-knockdown 76NE6 cells with wild-type elafin, but not M25G-elafin, reduced cell number to the level of controls (Figure 3E). These experiments revealed a critical role of elafin-mediated protease inhibition in the maintenance of G0 arrest. The inability of elafin-M25G to inhibit the growth factor independent proliferation of elafin knockdown HMECs (Figure 3E) suggests a critical role for its deregulated protease activity. Notably, the level of growth factor independent proliferation observed in elafin knockdown HMECs was modest (Figure 3C) consistent with the relatively low levels of NE activity in these cells (21). Since in the tumor microenvironment the majority of NE is contributed by activated neutrophils (22,23), we next interrogated the ability of exogenous NE to induce the proliferation of elafin knockdown HMECs (Figure 4). In this experiment, elafin-knockdown and control 76NE6 cells were growth factor deprived for 24 hours, and purified NE was added directly to the media as described (24). Cell density was measured using the MTT assay 48 hours after addition of NE (Figure 4A). Compared to controls, the elafin-knockdown 76NE6 cells stimulated with NE at concentrations of 1-8 nM demonstrated significantly greater sensitivity to the growth promoting effect of exogenous NE (Figure 4B). The ability of NE to induce proliferation was dose-dependent. Elafin-knockdown 76NE6 cells were sensitive to the growth-promoting effect of 2 nM NE, whereas elafin-expressing controls were not (Figure 4C). Complementation of elafin-knockdown 76NE6 cells with shRNA-resistant-elafin, but not shRNA-resistant-M25G-elafin, attenuated proliferation induced by 2 nM NE (Figure 4C). No differences were observed in this experiment between groups not treated with NE because cell number was assessed following only 72 hours of growth factor deprivation. [Significant differences in cell number were not seen in elafin-knockdown HMECs until 120 hours of growth factor deprivation (Figure 3C).] Pharmacological inhibitors of NE activity sivelestat and GW311616 inhibited NE-induced proliferation in 76NE6 cells (Figure S4, A and B); further evidencing that the mitogenic-effect of NE is dependent on NE-activity and not contaminants in the NE preparation. These findings provided evidence that elafin is an important component of the epithelial shield against deregulated NE activity. Microarray analysis identified differentially expressed genes between elafin-knockdown and control 76NE6 cells following 0, 48, and 168 hours of growth factor deprivation (Figure S5A). Upregulation of the immediate early response gene, EGR1, at the 48-hour time point was of particular interest given the previously identified role of EGR1 in cell cycle re-entry of G0-arrested HMECs (25,26). We validated the upregulation of EGR1 in 76NE6 elafin-knockdown cells by qPCR (Figure S5B). The ERK signaling pathway is known to control EGR1 transcription (26). Addition of NE (10nM) to growth factor deprived 76NE6 cells resulted in activation of ERK phosphorylation that peaked within 15 to 30 minutes (Figure S6A). Upregulation of ERK target genes EGR1 and FOS were observed 3 hours after the addition of NE to growth-arrested 76NE6 cells (Figure S6B). Addition of the MEK1/2 selective inhibitor U0126 and MEK1 siRNA effectively inhibited ERK phosphorylation following the addition of NE to growth-arrested 76NE6 cells (Figure S6C) and consistently attenuated NE-induced proliferation (Figure S6, D and E). Given the rapidity of ERK activation following the addition of NE, we hypothesized that an extracellular receptor mediates the mitogenic effect of NE on HMECs. TLR4 (27), PAR2 (28), and EGFR (29) have all been implicated in NE-induced ERK activation. We observed that knockdown of TLR4 reproducibly abrogated ERK activation in growth factor-deprived 76NE6 and 81NE6 cells (Figure 4D) following the addition of 10 nM NE (sufficient to overwhelm endogenous elafin and induce maximal proliferation in both 76NE6 and 81NE6 cells) and attenuated NE-induced proliferation (Figure 6E). These findings suggested that the mitogenic activity of NE in quiescent HMECs is dependent on TLR4-induced ERK activation. To examine the physiological relevance of elafin expression in human breast cancer, we initially measured elafin protein levels in 36 breast cancer cell lines and found that elafin expression was absent from all breast tumor cell lines examined as compared to 76NE6 cells (Figure 5A). Next, we translated thesein vitrofindings to patient-derived tissue specimens, where we examined elafin expression by IHC in normal breast tissue from reduction mammoplasty (n=15) and invasive breast carcinoma (n=202) using a highly specific monoclonal antibody against elafin (Hycult, clone: TRAB/2F) (30). Based on the absence of elafin in breast cancer cell lines, we hypothesized that elafin expression is downregulated in human breast cancer specimens compared to the normal mammary epithelium. Supporting our hypothesis, elafin was expressed within the epithelial compartment of the normal mammary gland (Figure 5B), but was absent from the epithelial component of human breast tumors (Figure 5C). In some cases, infiltrating leukocytes in the tumor microenvironment expressed high levels of elafin contrasting with the absence of elafin within the tumor epithelium (Figure 5C). Quantification revealed a significantly lower frequency of elafin positive cells in breast tumors specimens compared the normal mammary epithelium (Figure 5D). Our IHC analysis revealed that elafin was significantly downregulated in human breast tumors, suggesting that the epithelial shield against NE-activity is compromised during breast tumorigenesis. Next, we set out to understand the significance of deregulated NE-activity in a mouse model of breast tumorigenesis. We hypothesized that deregulated NE is capable of promoting breast tumor growth. Given the correlation between high levels of NE and ER/PR-negative status (31), we chose to test this hypothesis in a mouse model of triple-receptor negative breast cancer (TNBC). The C3(1)TAg mouse model has been shown to give rise to TNBC and is molecularly similar to basal-like breast cancer in humans (32-35). C3(1)TAg mice were crossed with the previously established NE knockout mice (2), both were maintained in the FVB/N background (Figure S7). C3(1)TAg x NE+/+ and C3(1)TAg x NE-/- cohorts were followed for tumor initiation and growth was followed until the tumor exceeded the maximal allowable size based on the requirements of the institutional review board. The doubling time of each tumor was calculated by application of the exponential growth model. Tumors in NE-/- mice demonstrated a significantly slower growth rate compared to tumors in NE+/+ mice (Figure 6A). To determine if the difference in the tumor growth rate was due to altered proliferation, tumors were subjected to qPCR analysis of the proliferation markers Mki67 and Melk (Figure 6B) and IHC analysis of BrdU incorporation (Figure 6C). The mRNA levels of both Mki67 and Melk were significantly suppressed in C3(1)TAg x NE-/- genotype tumors compared to C3(1)TAg x NE+/+ genotype tumors (Figure 6B). Significantly less BrdU incorporation was observed in tumors arising in NE-/- genotype mice compared to tumors arising in NE+/+ genotype mice (Figure 6D). IHC analysis of BrdU incorporation was also performed on the contralateral mammary gland of tumor bearing mice (Figure 6E). Quantification revealed significantly lower levels of proliferation in the mammary glands of C3(1)TAg x NE-/- genotype mice compared to C3(1)TAg x NE+/+ genotype mice (Figure 6F). The results presented here are consistent with decreased proliferation in C3(1)TAg x NE-/- genotype tumors compared to C3(1)TAg x NE+/+ genotype tumors. Overall, the data presented here provides directin vivoevidence that NE enhances tumor growth in a mouse model of TNBC. In this study, we examined the regulation/role of endogenously expressed elafin and the consequence of deregulated NE-activity on proliferation and tumor growth. Initially, we observed that elafin is upregulated at the transcription level in G0 HMECs (Figure 1F), which resulted in its intracellular accumulation (Figure 1B) and increased secretion into conditioned media (Figure 1E). Elafin transactivation required the transcription factor C/EBPbeta (Figure S1) and Rb-dependent cell cycle checkpoint control (Figure 2). Rb and C/EBPbeta are essential to the control of proliferation and differentiation within the mammary gland (36,37). Physical interaction with Rb was previously shown to be critical for C/EBPbeta DNA binding (38) and may play a role in the regulation of elafin expression in HMECs. The Rb and C/EBPbeta pathways are commonly deregulated in human cancers, likely accounting for elafin downregulation during breast tumorigenesis (16,39)The upregulation of elafin in G0 HMECs (Figure 1) suggested a role for elafin in normal growth control. Elafin is an important component of the epithelial shield against excessive NE activity (1). The conventionally understood role of deregulated NE activity in tumor progression is promotion of cell invasion and metastasis through extracellular matrix degradation and the cleavage of adhesion molecules (40). However, several NE-specific substrates have recently been identified with important roles in cell proliferation. For example, NE-mediated degradation of insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1) increased phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) activity such that NE knockout reduced downstream Akt activation and tumor cell proliferation in theloxP-Stop-loxPK-rasG12Dmouse model of lung cancer, (22). NE was also been implicated in cleavage of cyclin E into low-molecular weight isoforms capable of hyperactivating cyclin-dependent kinase 2, enhancing cell proliferation and inducing tumor formation in mouse models (41,42). We hypothesized that elafin is an important counterbalance against the mitogenic effects of NE-activity. Elafin knockdown HMECs proliferated in the absence of growth factors (Figure 3C). This effect could be ameliorated by reconstitution of wild type but not protease inhibitor domain mutant elafin, suggesting that deregulated serine protease activity underlies growth factor independent proliferation in elafin knockdown HMECs (Figure 3E). The level of proliferation observed in elafin knockdown HMECs was relatively modest and only evident following prolonged growth factor deprivation, consistent with the relatively low levels of NE activity in this HMEC system (21). In the tumor microenvironment, the majority of NE is contributed by activated neutrophils (23). To model this, we added purified NE to the growth factor deficient culture medium of HMECs, resulting in a robust, dose-dependent increase in cell proliferation. In this system, elafin knockdown HMECs demonstrated increased sensitivity to the mitogenic effect of NE compared to elafin expressing controls (Figures 4B). In models of inflammatory disease, the addition of exogenous NE enhanced cell proliferation bothin vitroandin vivo(24,43,44). The concentrations of NE resulting in a physiological responsein vitrovaries between studies; proliferation was induced in airway smooth muscle cell by addition of 0.35-1.7 nM NE (44), in keratinocytes by addition of 0.1-33 nM NE (24), and in lung fibroblasts by addition of 3.5-862 nM NE (29). In the present study, the concentrations of NE utilized to induce proliferation in HMECs ranged from 1-10 nM, which is comparable to previously published studies. Possible explanations for the variability in NE-concentration required to induce cell proliferationin vitroinclude: differences in the source/activity of the NE, the sensitivity of the cell lines, and the concentration of exogenous serine protease inhibitors in the culture medium. In our HMEC system, we found that activation of the ERK signaling pathway (Figure S6A) was required for the mitogenic effect of NE on HMECs (Figure S6D). This observation was consistent with previous reports demonstrating the activation of ERK signaling following addition of exogenous NE (29). NE-induced activation of TLR4 was previously reported (27). In our HMEC model system, knockdown of TLR4 completely inhibited NE-induced ERK activation (Figure 4D) and proliferation (Figure 4E). Breast tumor cell lines are known to express TLR4 (45), suggesting that deregulated NE activity may be an important endogenous activator of TLR4, downstream ERK signaling, and proliferation throughout breast tumorigenesis. We have also examined the ERK signaling pathway is breast cancer patients and find that NE positive tumor associated neutrophils correlate with the phosphorylation of ERK effector p90RSK and Rb (not shown), recapitulating our cell line data presented here. In this study, we demonstrate for the first time that elafin is indeed downregulated during breast tumorigenesis through IHC-analysis of patient-derived normal and malignant breast tissue (Figure 5D). Ourin vitroresults suggest that loss of elafin eliminates a critical counterbalance against the mitogenic effect of deregulated NE-activity. However,in vitrostudies fail to completely recapitulate the complex interactions between the tumor epithelial and stromal compartments. We used the C3 (1) TAG mouse model to directly investigate the role of NE in proliferation and found that, NE knockout in the C3(1)TAg mouse model of mammary tumorigenesis suppressed proliferation (Figure 6D) and reduced the kinetics of tumor growth (Figure 6A) compared to NE expressing controls. Extensive experimental evidence has demonstrated that the ability of tumor cells to recruit and manipulate non-malignant cell types, including leukocytes, governs their malignant growth potential. The cellular constituents of the tumor stroma are not susceptible to many of the selective pressures driving therapeutic resistance in tumor cells. Therefore therapeutic modalities targeting critical microenvironmental mediators of tumor progression may yield durable anti-tumor responses alone or in combination with existing therapies. Pharmacological inhibitors of NE have been developed for the treatment of inflammatory lung disease (46) and could be evaluated as a therapeutic approach to reduce breast tumor growth. Primary HMECs 70N, 76N, and 81N isolated from reduction mammoplasty samples and immortalized derivatives were obtained from Dr. V. Band and culture conditions are as described. (19). Target-specific shRNA was obtained in the pGIPZ lentiviral vector system (OpenBiosystems) from the MD Anderson shRNA and ORFeome Core Facility. Lentiviral packaging was performed in HEK-293T cells using the pCMV deltaR8.2 and pMD2.G vectors produced by the Didier Trono laboratory and made available through the Addgene repository. Target cells were infected with the virus-containing medium in the presence of 8 mug/mL polybrene. Elafin cDNA was cloned into the pDONR201 vector via the gateway BP clonase (Invitrogen). To create shRNA-resistant elafin, three consecutive codons along the shRNA targeting region were mutated at the wobble position using the Quikchange Lightning site-directed mutagenesis kit (Stratagene). The M25G mutation to the protease inhibitor domain (20) was created via the same method. All primer sequences are available insupplemental information. Following sequence validation, elafin pENTR vectors were cloned into the plenti CMV Blast DEST vector (Eric Campeau lab, obtained from the Addgene repository) using LR clonase (Invitrogen). Viral packaging was performed as described for lentiviral shRNA vectors. Elafin shRNA cells were infected with elafin containing plenti CMV vectors and selected in 20 mug/ml blasticidin and 1 mug/ml puromycin. Mouse monoclonal antibodies to elafin (clone: TRAB/2F, HyCult), total Rb (BD Biosciences), p53 (Calbiochem), ERK (clone: L34F12; Cell Signaling Technology), and actin (Chemicon); rabbit polyclonal antibody to phospho-Rb site Ser780 (Cell Signaling Technology) and TLR4 (H-80; Santa Cruz Biotechnology); and the rabbit monoclonal antibody to phospho-ERK (clone: D13.14.4E; Cell Signaling Technology). Immuno MaxiSorp U96 plates (Nunc) were coated with elafin polyclonal antibody (Hycult) at a concentration of 10 mug/mL diluted in 0.1 M sodium bicarbonate overnight at 4 degrees C. The plate was blocked in 1 mug/mL BSA (Sigma) in PBS (4 hours) prior to incubation with 200 muL of conditioned medium or serially diluted recombinant elafin (Calbiochem) as a control. The antibody used to detect elafin was clone TRAF/2O (Hycult) diluted to a concentration of 50 ng/mL. The secondary antibody used was 50 ng/mL goat anti-mouse IgG HRP conjugated (Thermo). The ELISA was developed using 1-Step Ultra TMB (Thermo), the reaction was quenched with 2 M phosphoric acid, and absorbance was measured at 450 nM. IHC examination of NE was performed on specimens from 220 breast cancer patients with stage I-III disease. These patients were enrolled in a prospective study between January 2000 and June 2010 (MD Anderson lab protocol 00222). The MD Anderson Institutional Review Board approved the use of all patient derived tissues and data. Deparaffinized slides were subjected to heat-induced antigen retrieval using citrate buffer (Vector). Endogenous peroxidases were quenched in 3% H2O2, and the sections were blocked with 1.5% normal goat serum and incubated overnight at 4 degrees C with primary antibody: mouse monoclonal antibody to elafin (clone TRAB/2F; Hycult) diluted 1:200, rat monoclonal antibody to BrdU (clone BU1/75 [ICR1]; AbD Serotec) diluted 1:1000, and rat monoclonal antibody to Ly6G ([Gr-1] clone 1A8; BD Biosciences) diluted 1:1000. Slides were developed using the VECTASTAIN Elite ABC Kit (mouse or rabbit IgG) followed by DAB substrate (Vector) and counterstained with hematoxylin (DAKO). For BrdU and Ly6G primary antibodies, biotin-conjugated rabbit-anti-rat secondary antibody (Abcam) was substituted for the secondary goat anti-mouse antibody included in the VECTASTAIN kit at a concentration of 1:2000. Evaluation was performed with a Leica DM light microscope using the 40x optical lens. Image acquisition was performed using a SPOT Imaging Solutions camera and SPOT Advanced software. The generation of C3(1)TAg (32) and NE knockout (2) mice were previously described. The NE knockout mice, originally in C57BL/6 were backcrossed to FVB/N strain of mice (same as the C3(1)Tag) for 12 generations. Tumors arising in the C3(1)TAg x NE-/- and C3(1)TAg x NE+/+ virgin female mice were measured bi-weekly using Vernier caliper. Mice were sacrificed, according to institutional guidelines, when tumor reached the maximum allowable size. Two hours prior to sacrifice the mice were injected intraperitoneally with 100 mg BrdU/kg body weight. The tumor was excised, half was fixed in formalin and paraffin embedding for IHC analysis and the other half was snap frozen in liquid nitrogen for mRNA extraction. The contralateral mammary gland was fixed in formalin and paraffin embedding for IHC analysis. All experiments were performed at least in triplicate. The results of each experiment are reported as the mean of experimental replicates. Error bars represent the standard deviation from the mean. If not otherwise indicated, pairwise comparisons were analyzed using the unpaired 2-sidedt-test (GraphPad Prism). For all tests, p less than 0.05 was considered significant.