In behavioral studies of weight loss programs, participants typically receive interventions free of charge. Understanding individual's willingness to pay can be helpful when evaluating funding models that include member contributions. Few studies have examined willingness to pay (WTP) for obesity treatment. Three reports were surveys of the general population and included references to hypothetical treatments. None-NoneAnother study surveyed those in a ten-year bariatric surgery study and referenced an unspecified treatment that would address their weight problems. NoneOne of the only studies to determine WTP among individuals currently in a lifestyle-based weight loss program found participants were willing to pay $1324 (Canadian, 2004) for a hypothetical three month lifestyle based weight loss program that included physician counseling every 2 weeks. NoneWTP was lower ($787 Canadian) for a hypothetical program that included group meetings but no physician involvement. Roux and colleagues noted that the hypothetical program with physician involvement, although preferred, was unrealistic and that the other program with group counseling more closely matched services currently available in the community. NoneIn the current study, we report WTP for a continued weight loss program at the end of a 24 month study among participants who were randomized to the active intervention groups in the Hopkins POWER trial, a three-arm randomized weight loss trial that enrolled a demographically heterogeneous study population. None,NoneThe study also examined differences in WTP among demographic groups and groups based on 24 month weight change. The POWER trial at Hopkins was a randomized trial examining the effectiveness of two lifestyle-based weight loss interventions (n=277) compared to a control group (n=138) among obese adult patients at six primary care practices. None,NoneParticipants were greater than =22 years of age, body mass index (BMI) greater than =30 kg/m2, with additional cardiovascular risk factor(s). WTP for continued lifestyle programing was assessed at month 24 follow-up among participants in both active intervention arms. An institutional review board approved the study, and all participants provided written informed consent. Study details have been published. None,NoneA brief description follows. Participants assigned to the two lifestyle interventions with a 5% weight loss goal and access to a study website that included learning modules and tools for self-monitoring weight, caloric intake, and exercise. During the first six months, the Remote Support Only (RSO) participants were offered 15 coaching calls and the In-Person Support (IPS) participants were offered 21 group sessions and nine individual coaching sessions (in-person or by telephone). From months 7-24, RSO participants were offered monthly calls and IPS participants were offered both individual and group sessions monthly. As previously reported, at 24 month the control arm loss -0.8 kg, RSO loss -4.6 kg (P less than 0.001 compared to control), and IPS loss -5.1 kg (P less than 0.001 compared to control) with no significant difference between RSO and IPS. NoneAt month 24, 40% of the intervention participants (n=105) achieved 5% weight loss. At month 24, 40% of the intervention participants (n=105) achieved 5% weight loss. Participants were asked by an interviewer, if their weight loss program could have continued with monthly coaching contact, would they be willing to pay in order to remain in the program? If a participant indicated a WTP, then they were asked if they were willing to pay various amounts ($10/month; $20/month; $40/month; $65/month and $100/month) until a maximum amount was identified. Three algorithms were implemented in an alternating sequence. The low algorithm started with $10/month then inquired about the next higher amount; the middle algorithm started with$40/month) and worked in an ascending or descending order based on participant response; and the high algorithm started with $100/month then inquired about lesser amounts. Among those willing to pay for the service (i.e. willingness to pay greater than $0), quartiles (Q1, Q2, Q3) for the maximum amount willing to pay were reported in US dollars per month. Estimated maximum payment ($/month) quartiles (Q1, Q2, Q3) were based on quantile regression and adjusted for each of the following categorical variables: age ( less than 55 and greater than =55 years); BMI ( less than 35 and greater than =35 kg/m2); race (black and non-black); sex (female and male); household income ( less than $50,000; $50,000-$99,999; and greater than =$100,000); treatment condition (RSO and IPS); weight change at 24 months ( greater than = baseline weight; less than 5% weight loss; greater than =5% weight loss); and initial cost presented (low initial cost, middle initial cost, high initial cost). Among the 277 participants in the active intervention groups, 13 were missing weight data, and an additional 31 were missing WTP data. Hence, 234 participants were included in these analyses. Among those who indicated a WTP (n=223) 46% were younger than 55 years of age, 50% had a BMI below 35 kg/m2 at baseline, 39% were Black, and 61% were female. Table 1reports the crude median amount participants were willing to pay (median=40) and [Q1=20, Q3=100]. The adjusted medians [Q1, Q3] were calculated using a single quantile regression analyses that included all categorical variables listed and the percentiles reported are adjusted for all variables in the model. The overall adjusted median was $45 per month. There was a statistically significant difference between the medianadjWTP of Blacks ($65/month) and Non-Blacks ($45/month), p=.021. The order in which response options were presented was also associated with WTP; those presented with the lowest amount first (i.e. $10/month) had a lower adjusted median payment ($25/month) compared to those who were presented with the highest value first (i.e. $100/month) who had a median of $45/month, p=.002. Neither weight loss, nor income was associated with WTP (p greater than .05). Figure 1displays the frequency of WTP responses, stratified by the initial level of payment presented to the participant. The algorithm that started with the low amount had the highest frequency of response in the $20/month category ( greater than 30%) and the algorithm that started with the high amount had the highest frequency of responses in the $100/month category ( greater than 30%). This is one of the first reports on WTP for a specified weight loss program after individuals had participated in the program. In the current study there was strong interest in a sustained intervention with 95% of participants willing to pay for weight loss program continuation, with an adjusted median WTP was $45 per month. Black participants were willing to pay more ($65/month) than non-blacks. Unlike other studies that found income was associated with WTP, income was not associated with WTP in the current study. None-NoneInterestingly, weight loss success in the two year program was not associated with WTP for further services. This suggests that even those who were not successful with their weight goal found value in the program. Perhaps some participants had personal goals for smaller relative losses or preventing weight gain. Willingness to pay in this study was lower than the amounts reported in previous studies (e.g. $100-$262 per month) which reference hypothetical treatments. None,None,NoneIt is not clear if the differences in WTP were associated with presentation of a hypothetical program versus payment for a real program well known to participants, or if the characteristics of the participants were different. It is noteworthy that the median WTP in our study is similar to advertised prices for commercial programs (e.g. Weight Watchers online, $42.95/month). NoneOur results were also similar to the WTP for continued lifestyle-based diabetes risk-reduction program (~$42/month) among those who participated in a diabetes reduction intervention study. NoneThe latter study was similar as it evaluated WTP for a specific lifestyle program at the end of a study among participants who had been enrolled in the program. One factor that was associated with WTP was the order in which responses were presented. Those presented with the lowest cost first had the lowest median monthly amount. Although there has been significant discussion regarding how to ask WTP questions, perhaps the most innovative approach is actually offer a program at a given fee to determine who enrolls. NoneWe inquired about WTP for monthly coaching and do not know the WTP for more frequent coaching contact found in the intensive phase of the program. Although there may have been a ceiling effect associated with the maximum survey response ($100), a few high responses would have a minor effect on these results given the use of medians in the analyses. Moreover, the association among income and WTP may differ in samples that include more low income participants. It should also be noted that missingness in weight loss studies is likely to be informative. If missing values were replaced with "unwilling to pay", then 80% of participants were willing to pay for continued services. Strengths of the study include a population appropriate for a weight loss program, reference to an existing weight loss program, and a diverse population. In summary, the vast majority of participants who completed a weight loss intervention were willing to pay for continuation of the program, with a median monthly amount that was similar to the cost of a commercial weight loss program.