The mitochondria generate most of the cellular ATP and reactive oxygen species (ROS), regulate cellular calcium levels, and initiate cell death through the activation of the mitochondrial permeability transition pore (1,2). Each mammalian cell contains hundreds of mitochondria and each mitochondrion contains multiple copies of circular mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) molecules. The mtDNA encodes 13 polypeptides central to the mitochondrial energy production system, oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS), as well as the rRNAs and tRNAs necessary for mitochondrial protein synthesis. The mtDNA is replicated from two origins, one for the G-rich heavy (H) strand located in the control region and the other for the C-rich light stand located 2/3 of the way around the mtDNA (3). Cells have developed extensive systems for maintaining mitochondrial integrity and disturbance of mitochondrial homeostasis can lead to multiple diseases (2). In general, the mtDNA has a higher mutation rate than nuclear DNA (nDNA) genes. The accumulation of mtDNA mutations has not only been linked to ageing (2,4,5,6), but also to cancer progression (7,8). However, the causative roles of mitochondrial genome integrity in ageing and cancer remain to be substantiated. SUV3 is a nuclear encoded ATP-dependent DNA/RNA helicase that primarily localizes to the mitochondrion. InSaccharomyces cerevisiae, Suv3 is a key component of the mitochondrial RNA degradosome besides the Dss1 exoribonuclease (9,10,11). Deficiency of SUV3 is associated with group I intron accumulation (10) and changes in the stability and processing of several mitochondrial RNAs (11). Yeast cells carrying null or mutantSuv3genes gradually lose their capacity to grow on non-fermentable carbon sources and acquire a petite phenotype (12,13). In human cells, depletion of SUV3 by siRNA leads to pleiotropic effects including decreased mtDNA copy number, a shift in mitochondrial morphology from tubular to granular, and eventual senescence or cell death (14). While the yeastSuv3and mammalianSUV3genes sharhe high sequence homology, salient differences between the two species such as the absence of Dss1 in human mitochondria and the lack of introns in mammalian mtDNA raises the question of whether the yeast and mammalian SUV3 serve analogous mitochondrial functions. To clarify the function of mammalian SUV3, we generated a mouseSuv3(mSuv3) knockout mouse. The homozygousmSuv3knockout mice were embryonic lethal, suggesting an essential role ofmSuv3in embyronic development. Heterozygous (mSuv3+/-) animals, on the other side, had a shortened lifespan, reduced fecundity, and increased tumor incidence. More intriguingly, such effects were maternally transmitted, as only the mother but not the father, harboring the mutatedmSuv3gene, could transmit the defects to subsequent generations regardless the progenies' nDNA genotype. The progenies ofmSuv3+/-females showed elevated mtDNA mutation loads and reduced mtDNA copy numbers. These data suggest that SUV3 is a tumor suppressor gene that inactivation of one allele leads to destablization of mtDNA integrity, causing the observed detrimental effects in mice. Based on the fact thatmSuv3+/- mice showed an increased tumor incidence, we quantitated the SUV3 mRNA level in two independent cohorts of human breast cancer specimens. We found that SUV3 mRNA expression was significantly reduced in tumor samples compared to adjacent normal tissue a panel of breast cancer specimens. Taken together, our data indicated that reduction of SUV3 expression level, either by genetic ablation of one allele ofSuv3in mice or other unknown mechanisms in human, could lead to destablization of mtDNA and promotes tumorigenesis, further supporting the notion that SUV3 is a potential human tumor suppressor that functions in a haploinsufficient manner. To test if deficiency in mammalian SUV3 would lead to detrimental effect in animal as a whole as it does in yeast, we inactivated themSuv3gene in embryonic stem (ES) cells to generate a knockout mouse model for SUV3. ThemSuv3gene was obtained by screening a 129/Sv-derived genomic library using the humanSUV3cDNA as a probe. The targeting vector,mSuv3-KO, was constructed by inserting an anti-parallelpgkneopAcassette into themSuv3location corresponding to codon 684 of the human SUV3, which rendered the SUV3 mRNA unstable and blocked SUV3 expression. The successfully targeted ES cells were used to generate chimeric mice, which ultimately resulted in germ line transmission of the knockout gene (Fig. 1A). An approximate 50% reduction in SUV3 protein level was observed inmSuv3 heterozygous (mSuv3+/-) mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEF) when compared to the wild type MEF (Fig. 1B). There was no detectable truncated SUV3 protein in heterozygous MEF, further indicating that the knockout allele is a null depletion of SUV3. ThemSuv3+/-mice were interbred and the genotypes of the offspring were determined at 10 days of age by PCR analysis of toe DNA. Out of the 74 animals screened, 52 were heterozygous (mSuv3+/-) and 22 were wild type (mSuv3+/+) with no homozygous mutant (mSuv3-/-), suggesting that themSuv3-/- embryos are non-viable, which is consistent with previously described (15). To pinpoint the time of death, pregnant females of E5.0 to E11.5 frommSuv3+/- intercrosses were sacrificed and the fetuses were subjected to genotyping. At both E9.5 and E11.5, nomSuv3-/-embryos was found; instead, many resorbed embryos were present. Hence, themSuv3 -/-embryos died by E9.5 (Fig. 1C). To further characterize the developmental defects, decidual swellings frommSuv3+/- intercrossed females were obtained between embryonic E5.0 to E8.5, and examined histologically following staining with hematoxylin/eosin. As shown inFig. 1D, bothmSuv3+/+andmSuv3+/-embryos exhibited normal growth, depicted by the elongation of the egg cylinder and formation of embryonic and extra-embryonic ectoderm, as well as distinct proamniotic cavities. By contrast,mSuv3-/-embryos presented abnormalities following implantation (E5.0 to E5.5), as they were smaller and failed to form the typical egg cylinders. By the time whenmSuv3+/+embryos underwent gastrulation (E7.5 to E8.0), the growth ofmSuv3-/-embryos were remarkably delayed. By E8.5, themSuv3-/-embryos started to degenerate and were resorbed, consistent with aforementioned genotyping results (Fig. 1C). To monitor the effect ofmSuv3mutation over generations, we carried out a systematic studies on intercrossed mice. The first generation (F1) of heterozygousmSuv3+/-mice obtained by crossing the chimeric founder male with C57/BL6 female had normal lifespan comparable to themSuv3+/+wild type mice (Fig. 2A). However, the second generation (F2) ofmSuv3+/-heterozygotes derived from intercrossing F1 heterozygotes had significantly shortened lifespan, which was aggravated in subsequent intercrosses ofmSuv3+/-mice for the third and forth generations (F3 and F4, respectively). In addition, some of the intercross heterozygous (mSuv3+/-) mice showed signs of premature ageing including kyphosis (data not shown). These data suggested that inactivating one allele ofmSuv3leads to reduced longevity over generations. Through pathological examinations, we found high incidence of solid tumors inmSuv3+/-mice. On autopsy, 90% of themSuv3+/-intercross mice exhibited a broad spectrum of tumor types, including lymphoma and carcinoma (Fig. 2B 2C). It was noted that about two thirds of themSuv3+/-mice succumbed to lymphoma. ThemSuv3+/-tumor incidence was substantially higher than the 30% incidence seen in themSuv3+/+mice from similar genetic crosses. To determine if the tumors inmSuv3+/-mice acquired a second mutation in the wild typemSuv3allele, we isolated tumor cells by micro-dissections (Fig. 2D) and analyzed the wildtypemSuv3locus by PCR. As shown inFig. 2E, all of tumor samples retained the wild typemSuv3allele. This was further confirmed by immunostaining with anti-SUV3 antibodies as the majority of tumor samples were SUV3 positive (Fig. 2F). These data combined indicated that loss of 50% of SUV3 protein, by genetic ablation of onemSuv3allele, is sufficient to predispose the mice for tumorigenesis. In the course of analyzing the third generation intercrossedmSuv3+/-mice, we found that even themSuv3+/+, the mice carrying two wild typemSuv3alleles, showed shortened lifespan and were prone to tumors at a comparable level to that of theirmSuv3+/-littermates (Fig. 3AandFig. 2B). This observation suggested that the reduced lifespan and increased tumor incidence were not simple consequences of the nuclear DNA genotype. Since SUV3 has been shown to be important in maintaining mitochondrial homeostasis (14), we investigated if a maternal factor might be contributing to the progressively declined lifespan and increased tumor incidence inmSuv3+/+mice of F3. Accordingly, we crossed F3mSuv3+/-males with C57/BL6 wildtype females. As shown inFig. 3B, the average lifespan of the heterozygous offspring with wild type mitochondria inherited from their mothers was 782 days, which was comparable to that of the first generation cohort (801 days). In contrast, when F3mSuv3+/-females were crossed with C57/BL6 males, the average lifespan of the their heterozygotes offsprings carrying mitochondria from theirmSuv3+/-mothers was 559 days, simlar to the lifespan of the F3 mice (Fig. 3B). Moreover, themSuv3+/+wild type offsprings generated from crossing F3mSuv3+/-females with C57/BL6 males also had reduced average lifespan of 631 days (Fig. 3C), which was significantly shorter than that of the heterozygous mice (mSuv3+/-) with mitochondria derived from wild type female (782 days), but not statistically different from the average lifespan (560 days) of offspring frommSuv3+/-females (P=0.37) (Fig. 3B). Autopsies performed onmSuv3+/+offsprings derived frommSuv3+/-female by C57/BL6 male crosses revealed presence of tumor nodules, predominately lymphoma and pituitary adenoma, with nearly complete penetrance (Fig. 3C). Apparently, the status of mitochondria on the maternal side determines the outcome of the lifespan and tumor incidence in their offsprings, rather than their own nDNA genotype in terms ofmSuv3. Similarly, the reproductive performance of themSuv3+/-strain also depends on the status of mitochondria function. The litter size and number of viable pups of the F1 and F2mSuv3+/-intercrossed mice were comparable to that of the wild type mice (6-8 pups) (Fig. 4A B). However, the reproductive output of such female declined in F3 (Fig. 4C). Severe reduction in reproductive performance was also found in themSuv3+/+F4 female (Fig. 4D). Besides, thesemSuv3+/+; mt-msuv3+/-pups that did survive were found to be sterile at 3-5 months of age, further suggesting the dominance of mitochondrial status over nuclear genotype. In the subsequent part of this communication, we designated the mitochondria derived from anmSuv3+/-female as (mt-msuv3+/-) and that from anmSuv3+/+female as (mt-msuv3+/+). To test whether mtDNA serves as the key factor that determines the maternally transmitted defects, we generated four genotype cohorts of mice by crossingmSuv3+/-male or female mice with C57/BL6 mice: Cohort A:mSuv3+/+; mt-msuv3+/+; Cohort B:mSuv3+/-; mt-msuv3+/+; Cohort C:mSuv3+/+; mt-msuv3+/-; and Cohort D:mSuv3+/-; mt-msuv3+/-(Fig. 5A). Then, mtDNA mutation load and mtDNA copy number of these four cohorts of mice were analyzed. A DNA region surrounding the L-strand replication origin (nt 4418-6409) was sequenced to assess mtDNA mutation load. As shown inFig 5A, the levels of new mtDNA mutations were increased about 3 folds in Cohorts B, C, and D compared to age-matched Cohort A or C57/BL6 mice. This data suggested that the deficiency of SUV3 increases mtDNA mutations load. Once the mtDNA mutations have been predisposed, they are stable and transmitted through the female germline, which may not be affected by nuclear genotype. To further characterize the effects of themSuv3+/-genotype on mtDNA metabolism, we analyzed the mtDNA to nDNA copy number ratio on the spleens of 15-month-old mice, quantified by real time PCR using mtDNA 12S rRNA and nDNA 18S rRNA primers (Fig. 5B). The mtDNA copy number was markedly reduced in Cohorts B, C, and D, relative to Cohort A. Hence, both themSuv3+/-nuclear genotype and themSuv3+/-female transmitted mtDNA contributed to the reduction in the mtDNA copy number. Hence, both the nuclearmSuv3mutation and the maternally inherited defective mitochondria did contribute to the overall reduction in the mtDNA copy number in the mice. Since these mitochondrial DNA aberrations may reduce mitochondrial activities, we then examined the biochemical activities of mitochondrial OXPHOS complexes I, II+III and IV, each containing one or more mtDNA encoded subunits. Mitochondria isolated from the brains of 10-month-old animals in Cohorts B, C, and D showed significantly reduced OXPHOS complex activities than those of Cohort A (Fig. 5C). Therefore, the increased mtDNA mutation rate and reduced mtDNA copy number indeed deteriorate mitochondrial energy production. To further validate the contribution of mitochondrial aberration to the aforementioned phenotypes observed inmSuv3+/-mice, we crossedmSuv3+/-with C57/BL6 for two additional generations to obtain sufficient progenies for each cohort. Consistent with our earlier observation, the average lifespan of the third generation of Cohorts C (489 days) and D (534 days) were significantly shorter than that of Cohorts A (732 days) and B (688 days) (P less than 0.0001) (Fig. 5D). Similar to the observation shown inFig. 3C, we found that Cohorts B, C, and D had tumor incidences approaching 100%, which were significantly higher than the 50% tumor incidence seen in Cohort A. These data further indicated that the reduced lifespan and increased tumor incidence correlate with the mtDNA aberration, rather than themSuv3nDNA genotype, supporting the hypothesis that the defective mtDNA is a key factor to the observed phenotypes. To determine if this mitochondrial dysfunction would impede cellular function, we generated MEFs from the four cohorts (genotyping shown inFig. 6A) and measured their proliferation capacity following the 3T3 protocol (16). By this protocol, the Cohort A MEF cells doubled in number every three days for eight passages, after which the cells were arrested in crisis state and the three-day cell counts were comparable to the inoculation levels. In contrast, the cells from Cohorts B, C, and D did not have an initial proliferative phase, but immediately showed low proliferation potential (Fig. 6B), suggesting these fibroblasts might already enter senescence when initially explanted. To determine if the reduced proliferative capacity of the Cohorts B, C, and D could be correlated to the loss of mtDNA integrity, we assessed the mtDNA copy numbers of the four cell cohorts at passage four. The mtDNA copy numbers of the MEFs from Cohorts B, C, and D were apparently less than half of that of Cohort A (Fig. 6C). Collectively, our data suggested that themSuv3+/-nDNA mutation and the maternally transmitted mtDNAs abnormalities leads to impaired MEF proliferation reminiscent of premature cellular senescence. As mentioned above, SUV3 is a highly conserved protein during evolution. Given the substantial stimulation in tumor incidence after inactivation of only one allele ofmSuv3in mice, it is likely that deficiency of SUV3 may also play a similar role in human tumorigenesis. To validate this, we compared the expression of Suv3 mRNA within a cohort of eighteen pairs of breast tumor and adjacent normal tissues. As shown inFig. 7A, eleven tumor specimens contained significantly reduced Suv3 mRNA. In another cohort with 19 normal tissues and 45 breast tumor specimens, the expression of Suv3 mRNA in tumors was also significantly lower than in normal tissues (Fig. 7B). These data provided us the first clinical evidence to support the notion that reduction of SUV3 expression may participate in human tumorigenesis, which can be resulted from the loss of mtDNA integrity. In this communication, we demonstrated that inactivating one allele ofmSuv3in mice shortens the lifespan and predisposes the animals to tumor formation with 90% penetrance. Heterozygote offsprings derived from crossingmSuv3+/- male with C57/BL6 female live as long as wild type mice whereas those from cronssingmSuv3+/-female to C57/BL6 male exhibit shortened lifespan. Moreover, shortened lifespan, reduced fecundity, and multiple tumor formations are seen inmSuv3+/+ mice with mitochondria derived frommSuv3+/-mother, suggesting the disease phenotypes follow patterns of maternal mitochondrial inheritance. Findings such as higher mutation rates and reduced mtDNA copy numbers are observed in the offsprings with mitochondria derived frommSuv3+/- mother, suggesting that SUV3 is a novel tumor suppressor that functions through maintainance of the mitochondrial genome integrity. Genomic instability is a hallmark of human cancer. Many of the tumor suppressor genes identified so far are critical for maintaining genome stability. For example, the prototypicRBgene has been shown to be essential in monitoring chromosome segregation fidelity and cell cycle entrance (17). p53, andBRCA1/2, participate in maintaining genome stability by regulating DNA damage repair response pathways in additional to other functions (18,19). For this group of tumor suppressor genes, both alleles are inactivated in tumor cells, but reintroduction of one wild type allele can suppress tumor growth by inducing cell cycle arrest or tumor cell apoptosis (20). On the other hand, another group of tumor susceptibility genes, such as Mismatch repair genes (MMR), Werner syndrome gene (WNS) and Bloom's syndrome gene (BLM), directly participate in DNA repair (21,22). Defects inMMRgenes can lead to mutations in the type II TGF-beta receptor, causing Hereditary Non-polyposis Colorectal Cancer (HNPCC) (23). However, different from the previous group of tumor suppressor genes like RB, reintroducingMMRgene back to HNPCC cells cannot suppress the tumor progression. The other two genes in this group,WNSandBLM, both encode RecQ helicases, and inactivating both copies of the genes results in premature ageing and cancer (22). Interestingly, inactivation of one allele of SUV3 helicase in our mouse model appears to trigger an increase of mtDNA mutations and a reduction in the mtDNA copy numbers, an analogy of mitochondrial genomic instability, leading to increased tumor incidences. These mutated and dysfunctional mitochondria are sufficient to enhance tumor formation even when both copies of wild typemSuv3were present. ThemSuv3knockout mice described here provides a unique genetic model to study mitochondrial genomic instability in cancer predisposition. It is noted that the protein level of SUV3 in mouse is critical for maintaining mitochondria genomic stability since the expression from just one copy of wild type allele is insufficient (Fig. 1). This haploinsufficiency principle appears to be the common mechanism seen in many other transgenic mouse tumor models that inactivating both copies of critical genes, such asAML1(24),p27KIP1(25),Lkb1(26),CtIP(27),Smad4(28), andRINT1(29), usually leads to cell death and embryonic lethality, while inactivation of one allele prediposes the animal to tumorigenesis. More intriguingly, tumor cells derived from these animals frequently keep the remaining wild type allele, instead of losing it as in the case ofRBorp53. If such principle also applies to human cancer, reduction of mtDNA as well as SUV3 protein should be observed in at least some human cancers. Indeed, when we surveyed two cohorts of human breast tumor specimens, the expression of SUV3 mRNA in tumors is also significantly lower than in normal tissues. These results implicate that a reduction of SUV3 expression may be involved in the tumorigenesis in a portion of human cancers. Thus, any genetic or epigenetic event that reduces the expression of SUV3 may contribute to mitochondria genomic instability and promote tumor formation. How does inactivating one allele ofmSuv3lead to mitochondrial genomic instability? SUV3 is known as a component of the mitochondrial RNA degradosome for decades (10,12,13). In yeast, we and others have demonstrated that inactivation of theySuv3gene leads to respiratory deficiency and compromised mtDNA integrity (12,30). In mammalian system, we also observed an accumulation of truncated mitochondrial RNA transcripts and reduction in mtDNA copy number in SUV3 knockdown cells (14). In fact, in addition to its role in RNA degradation (31), mammalian SUV3 has been shown to participate in several DNA processes, including unwinding double stranded DNA substrates (32), and associating with purified mitochondrial nucleoids (33). These potential biochemical activities of SUV3 suggest that SUV3 may be involved in preventing mtDNA mutagenesis and/or facilitating replication. Consistant with this notion, we have demonstrated that SUV3 is associated with actively replicating mitochondrial nucleoids in yeast (30), although a direct biochemical link remains to be demonstrated. Recently, an increase of mtDNA mutations has been observed in mice carrying a mutant POLG, a mtDNA mutator (34,35,36). However, the mtDNA copy numbers stayed at the same level as wild type animals (37), suggesting a potentially different mechanism from the role of SUV3 in maintaining mitochondrial genomic stability. It is noted that a small amount of SUV3 localizes to nucleus, where it interacts with BLM helicase (15). However, the precise function of such interaction remains to be established. Although we cannot completely rule out the potential nuclear role of SUV3 impacting on these phenotypes, our backcrossing data (Fig. 3) clearly indicated the maternal effect of SUV3. Regardless the mechanism, mitochondrial dysfunctions resulted from SUV3 insufficiency clearly enhances tumorigenesis, strongly supporting the notion that mitochondrial integrity is important during development and progression of cancers (2,38). It has been reported that mtDNA mutations are prevalent in colon cancer (39,40). Therefore, loss of mtDNA integrity may be a general feature for cancer, as the accumulation of mtDNA mutations may increase mitochondrial ROS production, which is a potent mitogen (41,42). SUV3 as a tumor suppressor operating on mitochondria is conforming with the growing data that both tumor suppressors and oncogenes can target to mitochondrial functions. For example, SIRT3, a newly identified tumor suppressor, is nuclear-encoded but localized to mitochondria (43). In addition, deregulation of metabolic enzymes such as NADP+-dependent isocitrate dehydrogenase enzymes (IDH1andIDH2) have been linked to human glioma (44,45). Thus, this new paradigm offers a potential mechanism for a group of human cancers with maternal inheritance otherwise recognized as sporadic cancer. TheMus musculus Suv3(mSuv3) gene was isolated by screening a mouse 129/Sv genomic library (kindly provided by Dr. Tom Doetschman, University of Cincinnati) using a 2.4-kb fragment of humanSUV3cDNA as the probe. A 5-kbBglIIfragment of the mousemSuv3gene was subcloned into the pBluescript SK vector (Stratagene, CA), yielding a pBg5 plasmid. The internalHindIIIsite, corresponding to amino acid residue 684 of human SUV3, was restricted and converted toSalIby ligation with aSalIlinker. ApgkneopAcassette (46) in antisense orientation was inserted into the engineeredSalIsite and the resulting plasmid was designated as pmSuv3-neo. TheBglIIfragment ofmSuv3-neo was then subcloned into a p2TK vector (47) to produce the final targeting vector designated asmSuv3-KO. SalI-linearizedmSuv3-KO targeting vector was electroporated into an E14.1 ES cells and selected in medium containing G418 (250ug/ml) and 2'-fluoro-2'-deoxy-1-beta-D-arabinofuranosyl-5-iodo-uracil (FIAU) (1uM). DNA extracted from the resistant ES cell clones was digested withBamHI-SalI, and analyzed by Southern blotting. A 0.8-kbBamHI-BglIIfragment, designated as probe A, corresponding to a region at 5' end of the genomic sequence in the targeting vector, was used to identify bands of 10-kb and 11.6-kb, that correspond to germ line wild typemSuv3and the homologous recombinant allele, respectively. An additional DNA probe corresponding to a fragment in the neo gene was also used to identify the neo-containing restriction fragment. Mice heterozygous (F1) for themSuv3mutant allele were mated and toes from F2 progeny were cut for genotype analysis. Embryos from timed pregnancies were dissected from maternal decidua. For embryos older than E9.5, the visceral yolk sac was collected and genotyped by PCR (48). For E4.5 to E8.5 embryos, uterine embryos were excised and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde. After embedded in paraffin, the embryos were sectioned and stained with Mayer's hematoxylin and eosin (H E). Genotypings were performed on the microdissected cells from stained slides. E3.5 blastocysts were flushed from maternal uterus and genotyped by PCR. The targeted allele, a 236 bp product within thepgkneopAcassette, was assayed using primers: forward: 5'-TGA TAT TGC TGA AGA GCT TGG CGG C-3'; reverse: 5'-TGG GAG TGG CAC CTT CCA GGG TCA A-3'. The wild type allele, 149 bp product within the targeted exon of the mousemSuv3gene, was assessed using the primers: forward: 5'-TCC AAG AAG GCG TGC ACA ACA TCA C-3'; reverse: 5'-ACT TTT GGT GCC ACG TGT CCT TCT C-3'. The F1 heterozygousmSuv3+/-mice were derived from crossing two chimeric mice with C57/BL6 mice, generating a hybrid between the 129SvJ and C57/BL6 inbred backgrounds. The F1mSuv3+/-mice were then interbred to generate mice with twomSuv3genotypes (mSuv3+/+andmSuv3+/-). The F2mSuv3+/-mice were interbred to generate F3mSuv3+/+ andmSuv3+/-mice. Similarly, F3mSuv3+/-mice were interbred to generate F4mSuv3+/+ andmSuv3+/-mice. Since the female F3 and F4mSuv3+/-mice were not very fertile, themSuv3knockout allele was maintained by crossing male F4mSuv3+/-mice to C57/BL6 females. The F1 to F4 mice, which were on a mixed C57/BL6 and 129SvJ backgrounds, were analyzed (Figure 2). The F3 heterozygousmSuv3+/-mice were crossed to C57BL/6 wild type mice, and the progeny were analyzed (Figure 3B). Subsequent crosses for two additional generations were analyzed inFigure 5D. FemalemSuv3+/-ormSuv3+/+mice were housed together with C57/BL6 male starting at eight weeks of age. The birth date and number of pups of each delivery were recorded. Pups were weaned at 21 days. Tissues were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde, paraffin embedded, and stained with H E. Immunostaining was performed using homemade SUV3 specific mouse monoclonal antibody 18C5 and Vectastain Elite ABC kit (Vector Laboratories, CA). Genomic DNA including mtDNA was isolated from agedmSuv3+/-mice by the Puregene DNA purification kit (Gentra System Inc, MN). The region surrounding the L-strand origin of DNA replication (OLfragment nt 4418-6409) was PCR-amplified using PfuUltra DNA polymerase (Agilent, CA) and primers: OLforward: 5'-TTT CAT AGG GGC ATG AGG AG-3'; OLreverse: 5'-AAG CAC GAT GTC AAG GGA TG-3'. The PCR products were subcloned into the Zero Blunt PCR cloning vectors (Invitrogen, CA). Forty-eight bacterial clones were isolated for plasmid DNA extraction. Sequencing were performed using primers: 4418F: 5'-TTT CAT AGG GGC ATG AGG AG-3'; 4698F: 5'-ACC ACT AAC AGG ATT CTT ACC-3'; 5262F: 5'-TAT CAC CTT AAG ACC TCT GG-3'; and 5865F:5'-CCC AGC CAT AAC ACA GTA TC-3'. The ratio of mtDNA to nDNA was determined by quantitative real time PCR using the cycling parameters: 95 degrees C for 5 min, 95 degrees C for 30s, 58 degrees C for 45s, for 40 cycles (49,50). Primer sequences included: mitochondrial 12S rDNA: 12S forward: 5'-ACC GCG GTC ATA CGA TTA AC-3'; 12S reverse: 5'-CCC AGT TTG GGT CTT AGC TG-3'; nuclear 18S rDNA: 18S forward: 5'-CGC GGT TCT ATT TTG TTG GT-3'; 18S reverse: 5'-AGT CGG CAT CGT TTA TGG TC-3' Determinations of samples and standards were performed in triplicate. The 12S/18S ratios were calculated from the means. OXPHOS enzyme analysis (51) was performed on isolated mitochondria, which were lyzed by three cycles of freeze-and-thaw in liquid N2and 37 degrees C water bath, respectively. OXPHOS complexes I, II+III and IV were assayed immediately using spectrophotometric assays. Complex I activity was measured as the rotenone-sensitive NADH oxidation rate at 340 nm. Complex II+III activity was measured as the cytochrome c (cyt c) reduction rate at 550 nm and complex IV activity as the reduced cytochrome c oxidation rate at 550 nm. Citrate synthase activity was used as a standard to normalize for mitochondria amount. Primary MEF cultures were isolated from individual E12.5 embryos obtained from crossing heterozygous male and femalemSuv3+/-mice with C57/BL6 mice. The MEFs were expanded for one passage and genotyped by PCR analysis. Complete DMEM with high glucose containing 10% fetal bovine serum, 25 uM/ml sodium pyruvate, 100 units/ml penicillin, and 100 ug of streptomycin was used for culturing MEF cells. For the prolifereation asssays, the MEFs were propagated according to the 3T3 protocol (16), in which the cells were harvested, counted, and 3 * 105cells were seeded into a new 60-mm dish every three days,. Cell lines were propagated until all MEF cultures entered crisis. Proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE, blotted to Immobilon-P membranes (Milipore, MA) and probed with antibodies against p48 (GeneTex, CA) or SUV3, using a mouse anti-human SUV3 polyclonal antibody generated against the GST-SUV3 fusion protein (amino acids 1-122). Quantitative real-time PCR was performed using Fast SYBR-Green master mix according to the manufacturer's instruction and analyzed on a StepOnePlus Real-Time PCR system (Applied Biosystems, CA). Human SUV3 mRNA levels were calculated according to the relative DeltaCt method using beta actin mRNA as an internal control. Primers used are: human beta actin: ACTB forward: 5'-ATC TGG CAC CAC ACC TTC TAC A-3'; ACTB reverse: 5'-TCA CCG GAG TCC ATC ACG AT-3'; human SUV3: SUV3 forward: 5'-ATC AGG GAG CCA GTC ACG AT-3'; SUV3 reverse: 5'-GCT GGG TGG CTC AGT AGC TT-3'. Except for the quantifications of specific immunoblots, mouse tumorigenesis assay and cell growth assay, all data are presented as means+/-standard deviation. Student's t-test was used to compare control and treatment groups. Asterisk (*) indicates statistic significance with P-value less than 0.05.