Bacteria assess their cell numbers and the species complexity of the community of neighboring cells using a chemical communication process called quorum sensing. Quorum sensing relies on the production, release, accumulation and group-wide detection of signal molecules called autoinducers. Quorum sensing controls genes underpinning collective behaviors including bioluminescence, secretion of virulence factors, and biofilm formation. None-NoneThe model quorum-sensing bacteriumVibrio harveyiintegrates population-density information encoded in three autoinducers AI-1, CAI-1, and AI-2, which function as intraspecies, intragenus, and interspecies communication signals, respectively. None-NoneV. harveyidetects the three autoinducers using the cognate membrane-bound receptors LuxN, CqsS, and LuxPQ, respectively. None-NoneAt low cell density (LCD), autoinducer concentrations are low, and the unliganded receptors act as kinases, funneling phosphate to the phosphorelay protein LuxU. NoneLuxU transfers the phosphoryl group to the response regulator protein LuxO, which activates transcription of genes encoding five homologous quorum regulatory small RNAs (qrrsRNAs). None,NoneThe Qrr sRNAs post-transcriptionally activate production of the transcription factor AphA and repress production of the transcription factor LuxR. AphA and LuxR are the two master quorum-sensing regulators that promote global changes in gene expression in response to population density changes. None-NoneAt high cell density (HCD), autoinducer binding to the cognate receptors switches the receptors from kinases to phosphatases, removing phosphate from LuxU and, indirectly, from LuxO. Dephosphorylated LuxO is inactive so transcription of theqrrsRNA genes ceases. This event results in production of LuxR and repression of AphA. NoneThus, the circuitry ensures that AphA is made at LCD, and it controls the regulon required for life as an individual, whereas LuxR is made at HCD, and it directs the program underpinning collective behaviors. Previous microarray studies examined the transcriptomic response during quorum-sensing transitions. That work showed that AphA and LuxR control over 150 and 600 genes, respectively and ?70 of these genes are regulated by both transcription factors. NoneBoth AphA and LuxR act as activators and as repressors, and thus the precise pattern of quorum-sensing target gene expression is exquisitely sensitive to fluctuating levels of AphA and LuxR as cells transition between LCD and HCD modes. Developing a comparable understanding of the quorum-sensing-controlled proteome requires measurement of dynamic changes in protein abundance throughout the transition from individual to collective behavior. In this work, we used the bio-orthogonal non-canonical amino acid tagging (BONCAT) method to track the proteome-wide quorum-sensing response inV. harveyiwith temporal precision. BONCAT enabled us to identify 176 proteins that are regulated during the transition from individual to collective behavior; 90 of these proteins are in addition to those identified in earlier studies. We show that a broad range of protein functional groups, including those involved in metabolism, transport, and virulence, change during the transition to group behavior. We demonstrate how particular temporal patterns of protein production are linked to particular tiers of the regulatory cascade by comparing the proteomic profiles of the regulon controlled by the post-transcriptional Qrr sRNAs to the regulon controlled by the transcriptional regulator LuxR. Using this approach, we, for example, determined that theV. harveyitype VI secretion system is LuxR-regulated. The BONCAT method was developed to provide time-resolved analyses of the cellular proteome. None,NoneIn a BONCAT experiment, the non-canonical amino acidl-azidohomoalanine (Aha; Fig. S1aNone) is provided to cells and, subsequently, incorporated into proteins in competition with methionine. NoneAha-labeled proteins are chemically distinct from the remainder of the protein pool and thus, labeled proteins can be selectively conjugated to affinity tags for enrichment and mass spectrometry analysis (Fig. 1a). Because Aha can be introduced into cells in a well-defined pulse, BONCAT offers excellent temporal resolution and high sensitivity to changes in protein synthesis in response to biological stimuli. NoneOur goal was to identify time-dependent changes in protein production associated with quorum sensing. We chose to monitor the transition from individual to group behavior inV. harveyibecause the core transcriptional regulon is well-established, providing a solid foundation for comparisons between transcriptional and translational outputs. NoneTo experimentally manipulate the transition from LCD to HCD, we usedV. harveyistrain TL25 in which the genes encoding the autoinducer receptors for CAI-1 (cqsS) and AI-2 (luxPQ) and the AI-1 synthase (luxM) have been deleted. NoneThus,V. harveyiTL25 responds exclusively to exogenously supplied AI-1, which enables precise control over the activation of quorum sensing. The hallmark phenotypic response controlled by quorum sensing inV. harveyiis bioluminescence, which is activated by LuxR during the transition from LCD to HCD. NoneThus, we reasoned that light production could serve as a proxy for activation of quorum sensing. NoneUpon treatment of a culture ofV. harveyiTL25 with AI-1, bioluminescence increases sharply after 30 min and plateaus at a level 400-fold higher than the pre-addition level after approximately 90 min (Fig. 1b). Detection of Aha incorporation inV. harveyicultures by in-gel fluorescence showed that BONCAT experiments could be performed in this system with a temporal resolution of ten minutes (Fig. 1c). Using the bioluminescence profile as a guide, we combined two techniques, BONCAT and stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC), to monitor both increases and decreases in protein synthesis in ten-minute intervals between 0 and 90 min following addition of AI-1 (Fig. 1band S1c and dNone). None,NoneV. harveyicultures that were not treated with AI-1 served as references for relative quantification. As expected, the production of the luciferase subunits LuxA and LuxB tracked with the bioluminescence profile in cultures treated with AI-1 (Fig. 1b). We detect LuxB at 30 min, slightly before we can detect LuxA. The LuxB measurement is coincident with the first increase in bioluminescence. Between 40 and 50 min, bioluminescence and LuxA and LuxB levels exhibited sharp increases, after which, both continued to climb at slower rates. Between 60 and 90 min, the production rates of LuxA and LuxB remained nearly constant while bioluminescence continued to increase. LuxA and LuxB increased about 8-fold total in response to autoinducer supplementation. This result highlights the fact that BONCAT measures protein synthesis rates during individual time intervals (not total protein abundance), whereas bioluminescence output reports on the total accumulated LuxAB activity. LuxA and LuxB are encoded by theluxoperon, which also encodes LuxC, an acyl-CoA reductase, LuxD, an acyl transferase, and LuxE, a long-chain fatty-acid ligase. LuxCDE synthesize the substrate required by the LuxAB luciferase enzyme. All five proteins exhibited large, concurrent increases in translation at 50 min (Fig. 1d). The increase in bioluminescence precedes production of LuxCDE, which suggests some basal level of luciferase substrate is present. The coincidence of the production of LuxA and LuxB with the onset of bioluminescence, and the simultaneous up-regulation of all of the proteins in theluxoperon validate the BONCAT technique as a reliable method for time-resolved analysis of the quorum-sensing response. At the core of the quorum-sensing circuit are the transcriptional regulators LuxO, AphA, and LuxR, which drive quorum-sensing transitions. Expression ofluxO,aphA, andluxRare themselves controlled by multiple regulatory feedback loops. None,None,None-NoneTo assess the consequences of addition of AI-1 toV. harveyiTL25 on these core regulators, we monitored both mRNA and protein synthesis using qRT-PCR and BONCAT, respectively. LuxO, AphA, and LuxR all showed rapid changes in protein production within 20 min of AI-1 treatment (Fig. 2). AphA and LuxR reached near-maximal differences in translation at the 30 min point; AphA protein production decreased 4-fold and LuxR protein production increased 16-fold. The mRNA levels ofaphAandluxRtracked with those of AphA and LuxR protein changes, with the exception thatluxRmRNA decreased in abundance between 60 and 90 min while the protein level remained constant. LuxO protein exhibited a consistent 2-fold increase in abundance throughout the time-course, whereas the corresponding mRNA levels slightly decreased. This pattern is consistent with the recent finding that the Qrr sRNAs controlluxOmRNA through a sequestration mechanism such that the Qrr sRNAs repress LuxO protein production while not significantly altering mRNA abundance. NoneUsing the above protocol for induction of quorum sensing inV. harveyiTL25, we next examined the quorum-sensing-controlled proteome using BONCAT to monitor protein synthesis in ten-minute time intervals immediately following addition of AI-1. We collected a total of 700 174 MS/MS spectra and identified 9238 peptides and 1564 unique protein groups (Fig. S3a and b, dataset S1None). Proteins were identified with an average of 6 peptides (median = 4); 88% of proteins were identified by 2 or more peptides (Fig. S3cNone). Relative protein abundances at each time point were calculated with an average of 49 unique quantifications (median = 17) (Fig. S3dNone). By comparing evidence counts, MS-MS counts, and MS intensities of Met and Aha-containing peptides, we estimated the extent of replacement of Met by Aha to be roughly 15% (Table S1None). Proteins with differences greater than 1.5-fold with false discovery rate-adjustedp-values less than 0.05 were considered significant. Induction of quorum sensing altered production of 176 proteins (Fig. 3a). Unsupervised hierarchical clustering partitioned the regulated proteins into 10 groups based on their temporal production profiles (Fig. 3a and b). Proteins from theluxoperon clustered closely (group F), and LuxR and AphA, which exhibited distinct production profiles, were assigned to very small clusters. Several clusters showed differences in protein production at early time points (groups D, E, I), whereas other clusters changed more abruptly at the 50 min time point (groups B, D, F, H) (Fig. 3b). Differences in protein production between AI-1-treated and control cultures were modest within the first 20 min, with only 7 and 19 significant protein changes at 0-10 min and 10-20 min, respectively. The number of autoinducer-regulated proteins increased with time after induction, with 42-119 proteins altered between 40-90 min after AI-1 treatment (Fig. 3c and d). 90 of the AI-1-regulated proteins are newly associated with quorum sensing inV. harveyi(Fig. 3e,Table 2). In total, our analysis identified 278 proteins that are members of the previously establishedaphA,luxR, or quorum-sensing regulons. NoneInterestingly, only 86 of these proteins exhibited significant up- or down-regulation by BONCAT (Fig. S4None). To identify major shifts in protein production in response to induction of quorum sensing, we used principal component analysis (PCA) to simplify the dataset by reducing the dimensionality from 9 time points to 2 principal components. Weighting vectors showing the contribution of each time point to the principal components highlighted three distinct proteomic states: (1) an early period in which few proteins changed (10-30 min), (2) a transitional period that included rapid changes in protein production (40-50 min), and (3) a late period in which many proteins exhibited large differences in translation (60-90 min) (Fig. 4a, Table S2None). As confirmation of these states, proteins with principal component coordinates near the 1st, 2nd, and 3rdsets of vectors exhibited time-course production profiles with punctuated changes at early, middle, and late stages (Fig. 4b). Gene ontology analysis identified 13 protein groups regulated by quorum sensing (Fig. 4cand S5None). Several of these groups were involved in transport, including iron, oligopeptide, and dicarboxylic acid transport. A set of 50 proteins with functional annotations for transporter activity was the largest of enriched ontology groups. Other groups of biological processes included bioluminescence, type VI secretion, siderophore synthesis, thiamine metabolism, and chemotaxis. To identify groups of functionally related proteins with similar patterns of protein production, we mapped protein interactions from the STRING database onto the PCA plot and scanned for protein networks that localizedviatheir principal components (Fig. 4d). Consistent with our gene ontology analysis, we identified interacting protein groups associated with regulation of bioluminescence, type VI secretion, chemotaxis, iron homeostasis, oligopeptide transport, and thiamine metabolism in the quorum-sensing response (Fig. 4d). For example, regarding peptide transport, synthesis of the substrate binding protein of the oligopeptide permease complex, OppA, decreased two-fold between 50-90 min. NoneAlso, a large group of proteins (16) involved in iron transport exhibited decreased production profiles late in the experiment, and a group of iron-regulatory proteins (6) increased in levels. With respect to chemotaxis, we observed both increases and decreases in protein levels: homologs of methyl-accepting chemotaxis proteins and the CheA and CheY signaling proteins decreased, whereas putative methyl-accepting chemotaxis proteins increased in abundance. Taken together, these results suggest an overall quorum-sensing-driven remodeling of iron homeostasis and chemotactic behavior. The Qrr sRNAs play a central role in dictating the transition between LCD and HCD states by controlling expression of the quorum-sensing transcriptional regulators, AphA, LuxR, and LuxO (Fig. 5a). None,NoneThe Qrr sRNAs directly regulate 16 additional targets outside of the quorum-sensing cascade with functions in virulence, metabolism, polysaccharide export, and chemotaxis. NoneThe direct Qrr targets constitute the set of "first-response" genes and also trigger the later, broader changes in downstream gene expression. With respect to the second wave of quorum-sensing gene expression changes, LuxR plays the major role. Therefore, we compared the temporal patterns of regulation of proteins known to be direct targets of either the Qrr sRNAs or LuxR. None,NoneWe detected regulation of production of seven proteins known to be encoded by Qrr-regulated genes, all of which exhibited significant differences in expression within 20 minutes of AI-1 treatment (Fig. 5b, Table S3None). Conversely, 20 of the 21 LuxR-regulated proteins identified by BONCAT showed differences in production only after at least 30 minutes of AI-1 induction. Thus, the differences in timing between Qrr- and LuxR-regulated genes reflect the underlying structure of the quorum-sensing circuitry. We investigated the protein production profiles of the newly identified proteins to pinpoint additional candidates for regulation by the Qrr sRNAs. We found 19 additional proteins that are regulated within 20 minutes of AI-1 treatment, suggesting that the corresponding mRNAs may be targeted by the Qrr sRNAs (Table 1). The candidates include two putative chemotaxis proteins, the serine protease inhibitor ecotin, the type III secretion protein chaperone SycT, a chitinase, and several other proteins involved in metabolism. Strikingly, the mRNA and protein production of VIBHAR_02788 (a predicted chemotaxis protein) increased 4- and 12-fold, respectively, within the first 10 minutes after AI-1 treatment, suggesting that VIBHAR_02788 is a good candidate for post-transcriptional regulation by the Qrr sRNAs (Fig. 5c). The mechanisms that control production of quorum-sensing-regulated proteins undoubtedly become more complex as the response progresses. We identified proteins that were regulated at all stages (early (0-20 min), intermediate (20-60 min), and late (60-90 min)) following AI-1 treatment (Fig. 5d, dataset S1None). Differences in the timing of quorum-sensing-regulated proteins suggest that additional regulatory components or mechanisms orchestrate the transition from individual to group behavior. For example, direct LuxR targets were regulated in both the intermediate and late phases, despite the fact that LuxR reaches its peak production at 30 min (Fig. 2a). This result suggests that accumulation of LuxR or additional transcriptional regulators contribute to control of LuxR-regulated genes. Components of the type VI secretion system (TSSS) were among the proteins most strongly up-regulated in response to AI-1 treatment (Fig. 6a). Identified TSSS proteins included the haemolysin co-regulated effector protein (Hcp; VIBHAR_05871), and two additional proteins whose homologs have been implicated in TSSS regulation and Hcp secretion (VIBHAR_05854 and VIBHAR_05858). None,NoneTSSS proteins exhibited a coordinated increase in production at 50 min, a profile similar to that of LuxCDABE. InV. harveyi, the TSSS homologs are encoded by five putative operons:VIBHAR_05855-05851,VIBHAR_05856-05858,VIBHAR_05865-05859,VIBHAR_05871-05866, andVIBHAR_05872-05873(Fig. S6aNone). Analysis of the mRNA levels of the operons confirmed the increase in expression of TSSS components between 50 to 60 min after AI-induction; timing consistent with second-tier regulation (Fig. 6b). Previous microarray data comparing wild-type, DeltaluxR, DeltaaphA, and DeltaluxRDeltaaphA V. harveyistrains showed that TSSS gene expression was reduced in DeltaluxRstrains, but expression was not altered in the DeltaaphAstrain, providing evidence that expression of TSSS genes is LuxR-dependent and AphA-independent (Fig. S6bNone). NoneConsistent with this notion, ChIP-seq data identified a LuxR binding site in the bi-directional promoter region ofVIBHAR_05855-05856. NoneUsing electrophoretic mobility shift assays, we confirmed the presence of this LuxR binding site and determined that LuxR binds to two additional promoter regions in the TSSS locus (Fig. S6cNone). This result shows that, unlikeVibrio choleraewhich deploys the Qrr sRNAs to post-transcriptionally regulate TSSS,V. harveyiuses LuxR to control TSSS production. NoneThis finding suggests that although both organisms have TSSS under quorum-sensing control, they employ different regulatory strategies to achieve distinct timing of TSSS protein production. Global transcriptomic studies ofV. harveyihave uncovered a continuum of changes in gene expression during the transition from LCD to HCD. AsV. harveyiresponds to changes in concentrations of autoinducers, shifts in the levels of the regulatory components AphA, LuxR, and the Qrr sRNAs occur, which in turn alter the expression of the downstream genes in the quorum-sensing regulon. Here we used the BONCAT method to measure changes in the quorum-sensing-regulated proteome during the transition from LCD to HCD, with a time-resolution of 10 min. We found correlated changes in production of the LuxCDABE enzymes and in the intensity of bioluminescence produced by the culture, and we observed regulation of the core regulatory components AphA, LuxR, and LuxO. Notably, the increase in LuxO upon induction of quorum sensing occurred at the level of the protein, but not the mRNA, consistent with the hypothesis that theluxOmRNA is regulated by sequestration by the Qrr sRNAs. NoneThe time resolution of the BONCAT method allowed us to identify proteins whose rates of synthesis were altered during the early, intermediate, and late stages of the LCD to HCD transition. The proteins found to be regulated within the first 20 min of autoinducer treatment included seven of the 20 known Qrr sRNA targets along with 19 other proteins not previously associated with Qrr regulation. No known Qrr targets were regulated at later times. In contrast, changes in the known LuxR targets occurred between 30 and 90 min following induction. Notably, proteins in the TSSS were up-regulated between 40 and 50 min following autoinducer treatment, suggesting LuxR regulation of type VI secretion inV. harveyi; this conclusion was confirmed by electrophoretic mobility shift assays. Several LuxR-regulated genes exhibited changes in protein production only very late in the BONCAT experiment, which suggests either that they are responsive to accumulating LuxR levels, that they are regulated by another transcription factor downstream of LuxR, or that they are co-regulated by other factors. We found quorum-sensing-dependent changes in 176 proteins that span a broad range of functional groups, including those related to iron homeostasis, molecular transport, metabolism, and chemotaxis. Ninety of these proteins are newly associated with quorum sensing inV. harveyi, and expand what is known about the roles that quorum sensing plays in these processes. None,NoneThe remaining 86 proteins are members of the previously established quorum-sensing, AphA, and/or LuxR regulons. Interestingly, nearly 200 other proteins from these regulons were identified by BONCAT but were not significantly up- or down-regulated. For example, the quorum-sensing regulon, which was defined by differences in gene expression between a mutantV. harveyistrain locked at LCD and a strain locked at HCD, contains 365 regulated genes as determined by microarray analysis. NoneWe quantified protein expression levels of 127 (35%) of these genes, 45 (35%) of which were significantly regulated. The differences between the genetic and proteomic results may arise, at least in part, from differences in regulation at the levels of mRNA and protein, or from differences in the growth media used in the two experiments (rich (LM) medium in the genetic studyvs.minimal (AB) medium here). None,NoneFurthermore, we would not expect the rapid addition of saturating amounts of AI-1 to aV. harveyiculture to reproduce precisely the effects of genetically locking the strain into either the LCD or the HCD state. Determining how environmental conditions affect the quorum-sensing response will be important to the development of a full understanding of bacterial communication in complex natural environments. The BONCAT method has allowed us to identify a diverse set of proteins that respond to the induction of quorum sensing inV. harveyi. The method facilitates monitoring of changes in protein synthesis on a time scale of minutes, and enables correlation of those changes with the underlying temporal pattern of regulation of the quorum-sensing response. The approach described here should prove useful in studies of a wide variety of time-dependent cellular processes. For each set of experiments, overnight cultures ofV. harveyistrain TL25 (DeltaluxMDeltaluxPQDeltacqsS) was used to inoculate 625 mL of AB minimal medium containing 18 amino acids (-Met, -Lys) at an OD600of 0.003. NoneThe culture was divided into six 100 mL aliquots. Three aliquots were supplemented with "light" Lys and three were supplemented with "heavy" Lys (U-13C6U-15N2l-lysine, Cambridge Isotope Laboratories). When the aliquoted cultures reached an OD600of 0.1 (?5 doublings), two "heavy" cultures (replicates 1 and 2) and one "light" culture (replicate 3) were treated with AI-1 at a final concentration of 10 muM ('AI-1 added'); the other three cultures were left untreated ('no AI-1 added'). At the specified time intervals, Aha was pulsed into all six cultures at a final concentration of 1 mM. After 10 min of Aha treatment, protein synthesis was halted by the addition of 100 mug mL-1chloramphenicol (Sigma). Cells were pelleted, frozen at -80 degrees C, and stored for downstream processing. Aha was synthesized as described previously. NoneCultures were grown at 30 degrees C in a shaking incubator at 250 rpm. To measure changes in gene expression following induction of quorum sensing inV. harveyiTL25, cultures were grown as described above, divided in half, and AI-1 was added to one of the aliquots. Samples were collected every 10 min and RNA was isolated as described previously. NonecDNA synthesis and qRT-PCR were performed as described previously. NoneThe levels of gene expression were normalized to the internal standardhfqusing either the DeltaDeltaCTmethod or the standard curve method. At least two replicates were collected for each sample ('AI-1 added' or 'no AI-1 added'). The graphs show the average of those measurements and are calculated as 'AI-1 added' divided by 'no AI-1 added'. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays were performed as previously described. NonePCR products were generated using oligonucleotides (Integrated DNA Technologies) listed in Table S4. NoneCells were lysed by heating in 1% SDS in PBS at 90 degrees C for 10 min and lysates were cleared by centrifugation. Protein concentrations were determined with the BCA protein quantitation kit (Thermo Scientific), and paired 'light' and 'heavy' cultures were mixed at equal quantities of total protein. Azide-alkyne click chemistry was performed as described in Honget al. with a 0.1 mM alkyne-DADPS tag and allowed to proceed for 4 h at room temperature (Fig. S1eNone). NoneThe DADPS tag was synthesized as described previously. NoneProteins were concentrated by acetone precipitation and solubilized in 2% SDS in PBS. Solutions were diluted to 0.15% SDS in PBS, and tagged proteins were captured by incubating with streptavidin UltraLink resin (Thermo Scientific) for 30 min at room temperature. Resin was washed with 35 column volumes of 1% SDS in PBS and 10 column volumes of 0.1% SDS in ddH2O. The DADPS tag was cleaved by incubating the resin in 5% formic acid in 0.1% SDS in ddH2O for 1 h. Columns were washed with 5 column volumes of 0.1% SDS in H2O, during which proteins remained bound, and proteins were subsequently eluted in 15 column volumes of 1% SDS in PBS. Protein enrichment was confirmed by SDS-PAGE, and eluted proteins were concentrated on 3 kDa MWCO spin filters (Amicon). Concentrated proteins were separated on precast 4-12% polyacrylamide gels (Life Technologies) and visualized with colloidal blue stain (Life Technologies). Lanes were cut into 8 slices and proteins were destained, reduced, alkylated, digested with LysC (Mako), and extracted as described in Bagertet al. NoneExtracted peptides were desalted with custom-packed C18columns as described in Rappsilberet al. , lyophilized, and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid (Sigma). NoneLiquid chromatography-mass spectrometry and data analyses were carried out on an EASY-nLC-orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) as previously described with the following modifications. NoneFor the EASY-nLC II system, solvent A consisted of 97.8% H2O, 2% ACN, and 0.2% formic acid and solvent B consisted of 19.8% H2O, 80% ACN, and 0.2% formic acid. For the LC-MS/MS experiments, samples were loaded at a flow rate of 500 nL min-1onto a 16 cm analytical HPLC column (75 mum ID) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18AQ 3 mum resin (120 A pore size, Dr Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany). The column was enclosed in a column heater operating at 30 degrees C. Afterca. 20 min of loading time, the peptides were separated with a 60 min gradient at a flow rate of 350 nL min-1. The gradient was as follows: 0-30% solvent B (50 min), 30-100% B (1 min), and 100% B (8 min). The orbitrap was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode to alternate automatically between a full scan (m/z= 300-1700) in the orbitrap and subsequent 10 CID MS/MS scans in the linear ion trap. CID was performed with helium as collision gas at a normalized collision energy of 35% and 30 ms of activation time. Thermo RAW files were processed with MaxQuant (v. 1.4.1.2) using default parameters and LysC/P as the enzyme. Peptide and protein false discovery rates were fixed at 1% using a target-decoy approach. Additional variable modifications for Met were Aha (-4.9863),l-2,4-diaminobutanoate (-30.9768), a product of Aha reduction, alkyne-DADPS (+835.4300), and 5-hexyn-1-ol (+93.0868), a product of alkyne-DADPS cleavage. Multiplicity was set to 2, and light and heavy (+8.0142) lysine labels were specified for all experiments. Aha and 5-hexyn-1-ol modifications were included in protein quantification. We required protein quantifications to be calculated with at least two evidences for each set of experiments. Both pooled variances and bootstrap statistical methods were employed as previously described to estimate the individual protein ratio standard errors. None,NoneFirst, pooled estimates of peptide variation were calculated separately for peptides with well-characterized ratios and those based on requantification in MaxQuant. Second, standard errors of the overall protein ratios were calculated by generating 1000 bootstrap iterations. These iterations were generated by resampling the replicates and peptides and adding a small amount of random variation to each measurement based on the pooled variance estimates. Once the bootstrapped samples were generated for each protein, the standard error of the protein ratio was calculated from the standard deviation of the bootstrapped iterations. Using the standard error, proteins with ratios significantly different from 1 : 1 were identified using aZ-test andp-values were adjusted to account for multiple hypothesis testing using the Benjamini and Hochberg method. NoneHierarchical clustering was performed with R (v. 3.1.1) using Ward's method. NoneConfidence intervals (95thpercentile) for cluster time-series data were calculated by a bootstrapping approach using the tsplot function from the Python (v. 2.7) module seaborn (v. 0.4.0). Singular value decomposition was computed for PCA with the Python module matplotlib.mlab (v. 1.4.0). Gene ontology analysis was performed using a combination of GO terms and KEGG orthology and module terms. Group scores were defined as the mean of protein distances from the origin of the PCA biplot (PC1vs.PC2). Statistical cutoffs (p-value less than 0.05) were calculated using a bootstrapping approach that calculates scores for 100 000 groups randomly selected from the total pool of quantified proteins. Cutoffs were calculated individually for each group size (n= 4, 5,etc.) and groups with fewer than 4 members were excluded. Version 9.1 of the STRING database was used for identifying protein interactions, and interacting networks were identified by manual inspection. None