Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most common malignant primary brain tumor in adults. Four out of every 100,000 Americans are diagnosed with GBM, which represents ~15% of all primary brain tumors (1). Once the diagnosis of GBM has been made, the overall median survival time for patients treated with surgery, radiation and chemotherapy is only 14 to 15 months (2). The identification of GBM-associated cancer stem cells (CSCs) or GBM-associated brain tumor initiating cells (BTIC) has fueled research into the contributing role of this cell type in GBM pathogenesis and chemotherapy resistance (3). The BTIC were shown to be capable of self-renewal and multi-lineage differentiation, they initiate tumor formation upon intracranial implantation within mice, and exhibit elevated therapeutic resistance relative to bulk glioma cells (4). Therefore, elucidation of the molecular mechanisms underlying BTIC maintenance and proliferation offers new molecular targets for developing more effective GBM treatments. An intriguing molecular target for GBM therapy is casein kinase 2 (CK2), which is a highly ubiquitous and conserved protein serine/threonine kinase composed of two catalytic subunits (CK2alpha or CK2alpha') and two regulatory subunits (CK2beta) (5). CK2 had increased protein expression or activity in the majority of cancers examined and its growth-related functions have been supported by the identification of a large number of growth-related proteins substrates (6). CK2 is believed to be involved in GBM tumorigenesis, since inhibition of CK2 activity through small molecule inhibitors or siRNA induced apoptosis, and reduced growth in mouse xenograft models of human GBMs (7-11). In addition, there is evidence suggesting that the CK2alpha subunit plays an important role in GBM. A genome-wide analysis of GBMs revealed an increase in the CK2alpha gene (CSNK2a1) (10), and enhanced CK2alpha expression has been observed compared with pair-matched normal brain samples (12). In addition to its possible role in GBM tumorigenesis, there are recent reports indicating CK2alpha may play a role of BTIC maintenance and growth in GBM. For example, inhibition of CK2alpha was shown to impact the self-renewal capabilities of leukemia stem cells (13) and non-small cell lung carcinoma stem cells (14). CK2alpha has also been shown to play an important role in neural stem cell proliferation and differentiation, indicating a potential role in BTIC in GBM (15). Additionally,in vitrostudies indicate that CK2alpha may also be involved in BTIC growth by controlling well known mediators of GBM including the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway (16-18). To determine if CK2alpha does play an integral role in GBM tumorigenesis and in BTIC growth, we first generated immortalized GBM cell lines that had modulated CK2alpha expression. We verified that inhibition of CK2alpha using short interfering RNA (siRNA), short hairpin (shRNA), or small molecule inhibitors decreased growth, colony formation, and tumor size in mice. Moreover, we also discovered that an important regulator of BTIC in GBM, beta-catenin, was decreased when CK2alpha activity was inhibited. We extended our findings to tumor spheres generated from GBM patients and determined that inhibition of CK2alpha decreased tumor sphere self-renewal, size, andin vivotumorigenic potential of these cell lines. Through our work, we demonstrate for the first time that CK2alpha may play an important role in BTIC maintenance through the regulation of beta-catenin in GBM. Enhanced CK2alpha expression or activity has been observed in a variety of solid tumors including GBM. To verify that CK2alpha is overexpressed in GBM we analyzed primary samples from GBM patients. Consistent with previous reports, we discovered that 57% (4/7) of the GBM samples had a 2- to 5-fold increase in CK2alpha protein expression compared with normal brain samples (10;12). We also conducted QPCR and verified that CK2alpha mRNA expression was enhanced in the same GBM patient samples (Fig. 1A and B). To expand on our initial findings we also analyzed CK2alpha expression using the R2 microarray analysis and visualization platform (R2: microarray analysis and visualization platform (http://r2.amc.nl)). We discovered that compared to an expression data set containing 172 normal brain sections, CK2alpha expression was significantly increased in a data set derived from 84 GBM samples (19)(Supplemental Fig. S1A). We determined that the difference was statistically significant (p = 1.2*10-10) using One Way Analysis of Variance (ANOVA). We also analyzed a data set that contained 101 tumor stem cells that were derived from GBM patients (20)(Supplemental Fig. S1A). Consistently, we saw a reduction in CK2alpha expression in the normal brain data set when compared to the GBM data set that was statistically significant (p = 1.3*10-8). We also conducted a preliminary prognosis analysis of CK2alpha expression in GBM patients using the Repository of Molecular Brain Neoplasia Data (Rembrandt). By sorting the GBM patients into high or low expression of CK2alpha, our findings suggest that GBM patients with high CK2alpha expression has a trend towards a worse prognosis compared with their low-expressing counterparts (Fig. 1C). While our findings were not statistically significant (p = 0.08) we expanded our initial findings to The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). We discovered that when the GBM patients were separated by subtype (classical, mesenchymal, neural, and proneural) only the mesenchymal subgroup had a statistically significant change (p = 0.034) in patient prognosis when comparing patients with high versus low CK2alpha expression (Fig. 1D). The remaining subtypes did not have a statistically significant change in patient survival when the GBM patients were separated by CK2alpha expression (Supplemental Fig. S1B). To verify that CK2alpha is involved in GBM tumorigenesis, we modulated CK2 expression in two GBM cell lines, U87-MG and U138. We stably transduced YFP-tagged CK2alpha and CK2beta using a retrovirus and verified the expression of each gene (Fig. 2A). The U87-MG cells transduced with CK2alpha exhibited enhanced cell growth and anchorage-independent growth, while exogenous expression of CK2beta only enhanced cell growth compared with the YFP-transduced cells (Fig. 2B and D). We saw similar results in the U138 YFP-CK2alpha and YFP-CK2beta transduced cells (Fig. 2C). These findings suggest that CK2alpha overexpression, and to a lesser extent CK2beta, increased GBM tumorigenic phenotypes. To confirm the importance of CK2alpha, we decreased both CK2alpha and CK2beta expression 5- to 10-fold using siRNAs in both U87-MG and U138 cell lines (Fig. 3A). We verified our siRNA specificity by monitoring the expression of the corresponding CK2 isoform. Little to no change was observed in CK2beta expression when our cells were treated with siRNA to CK2alpha (siCK2alpha), as well as the reverse with siCK2beta and CK2alpha expression (Fig. 3A). While reducing either CK2 subunit decreased GBM cell growth, decreasing CK2alpha had a larger reduction in growth (Fig. 3B,Supplemental Fig. S2A). In addition, only the reduction in CK2alpha inhibited anchorage-independent growth, confirming CK2alpha as a key regulator of GBM tumorigenisis (Fig. 3C). We also conducted a dose-dependent assay using multiple small molecule CK2 inhibitors (TBBz and CX-4945) and found that inhibiting CK2 activity through these inhibitors also decreased GBM cell and anchorage-independent growth (Fig. 3D to F,Supplemental Fig. S2B). Our data are consistent with prior studies and taken together our preliminary data further confirm the importance of CK2alpha in GBM tumorigenesis. We extended our study by testing the effects of reduction of CK2alpha expression on tumor formation, predicting that reducing endogenous CK2alpha expression would reduce the tumorigenicity of GBM cells. We generated an inducible shRNA to CK2alpha in U87-MG cells (U87 shCK2alpha). With doxycycline (Dox) induction (shCK2alpha+Dox), CK2alpha protein expression was reduced 3- to 4-fold compared with the uninduced control (shCK2alpha-Dox) and the uninfected cells induced with doxycycline (uninfect+Dox) (Fig. 4A). Even though CK2alpha expression was decreased with doxycycline induction, we did not observe a change in CK2beta levels, indicating that the shRNA to CK2alpha was specific (Fig. 4A). The U87 shCK2+Dox cells consistently had significantly less cell growth compared with the shCK2alpha-Dox control cells (Fig. 4B). Subsequently, we pretreated the U87-MG shCK2alpha cells with doxycycline and performed intracranial injections into NOD scid gamma mice. The mice were injected with 50,000 U87 shCK2alpha+Dox or shCK2alpha-Dox cells. We determined that the mice injected with the U87 shCK2alpha+Dox cells had significantly higher survival compared with the mice injected with U87 shCK2alpha-Dox cells, with the median survival time after tumor implantation increasing from 20 days to greater than 40 days (P= 0.0009) (Fig. 4C). To investigate tumor growth after implantation we harvested the mouse brains at 10 and 35 days and conducted hematoxylin and eosin staining to determine the growth of the tumors. At 10 days there was a significant reduction in tumor size and growth in the U87 shCK2alpha+Dox cells compared with the shCK2alpha-Dox controls (Fig. 4D). A similar change was observed at 35 days as well (Fig. 4D). We verified that CK2alpha protein and mRNA expression were reduced in the tumors derived from the U87 shCK2alpha+Dox cells compared with the shCK2alpha-Dox cells (Fig. 4E and F). We discovered in our GBM cell lines that beta-catenin protein levels were reduced 2- to 3-fold only when CK2alpha expression was reduced using siCK2alpha and shCK2alpha (Figs. 3Aand4A). To determine if the decrease in beta-catenin protein levels significantly altered its transcriptional activity, we generated GBM cell lines that were stably transduced with a previously published Wnt/beta-catenin GFP reporter construct (21). This reporter plasmid has seven beta-catenin/LEF-1 transcriptional response elements that precede GFP. Therefore when beta-catenin is active it will transcribeGFP, and expression of GFP can be used to measure the transcriptional activity of beta-catenin. U87-MG and U138 transduced with the GFP reporter treated with siRNA to CK2alpha exhibited a 2- to 3-fold reduction in both beta-catenin expression and transcriptional activity as measured by GFP expression (Fig. 5A). We also measured two beta-catenin-regulated genes,OCT4andNANOG. Conducting QPCR on the U87-MG siRNA-treated cells, we determined that cells deficient in CK2alpha, but not CK2beta, had a 2- to 3-fold reduction in bothOCT4andNANOGmRNA (Fig. 5B). To verify that CK2alpha inhibition decreased beta-catenin transcriptional activity, we treated U87-MG and U138 transduced cell lines with the CK2alpha inhibitors TBBz or CX-4945. We found that inhibition of CK2alpha activity also resulted in a 2- to 3-fold decrease in beta-catenin protein expression and a 2- to 10-fold decrease in its transcriptional activity as measured by GFP expression (Fig. 5C and D). QPCR analysis of the treated cell lines also consistently showed a 2-fold decrease inOCT4andNANOG(Fig. 5E and F). To determine if the beta-catenin is a major signaling pathway by which CK2alpha can regulate GBM tumorigenesis, we stably transduced beta-catenin in U87 shCK2alpha and U138 shCK2alpha cell lines. We verified that even after Dox treatment, resulting in a 2- to 3-fold reduction in CK2alpha expression, beta-catenin expression was increased to similar levels as the cell lines not treated with Dox (Fig. 5G). Upon reintroduction of beta-catenin we discovered that cell growth and anchorage independent growth in cells lacking CK2alpha expression was rescued to levels similar to cell lines not treated with Dox (Fig. 5H-J). The canonical Wnt/beta-catenin signaling was shown to play a key role in the regulation of tissue self-renewal (22) and has been well studied in BTIC in GBM. In addition,OCT4andNANOGwere both previously found to regulate BTIC growth (23). Our findings suggest that CK2alpha may be involved in maintaining BTIC through the regulation of beta-catenin. To explore the significance of CK2alpha in BTICs, we generated multiple GBM tumor spheres cell lines from GBM patient samples. Tumor spheres have become widely accepted as a method for culturing cells that are enriched for cells that are capable of self-renewal and tumor initiation from primary GBM (24). We initially verified that our GBM tumor spheres were enriched for BTIC by monitoring CD133 expression. Using FACS, we determined that our tumor spheres were enriched for CD133+ cells (75% to 95%) compared with the isotype control, indicating that our tumor spheres were enriched for BTIC (Fig. 6A). Further analysis of the CD133+ subpopulation showed that CK2alpha mRNA expression was not significantly different compared to the CD133- group (Supplemental Fig. S3). We also compared the CD15+ and CD15- subpopulations and did not observe a significant difference. This finding was consistent with previously published findings and were not too surprising since CK2alpha has been shown to play an integral role in a variety of cellular processes including: regulating proliferation/apoptosis balance, the UPR (unfolded protein response), rRNA synthesis, and spliceosome functions (25). To determine if CK2alpha is important in BTIC we generated tumor spheres that upon doxycycline induction would express shRNAs specific to CK2alpha (shCK2alpha+Dox). We determined that induction of doxycycline reduced CK2alpha protein expression 3-fold and mRNA expression 2-fold compared with the uninduced tumor spheres (shCK2alpha-Dox) or the control tumor spheres that were not infected but were treated with doxycycline (uninfect+Dox). There was no change in CK2beta protein expression indicating that our shRNA was specific to CK2alpha (Fig. 6B). Consistent with our previous findings, we also observed a 2- to 3-fold decrease in beta-catenin levels and a 2-fold reduction inOCT4andNANOGmRNA levels in the shCK2alpha+Dox tumor spheres compared with the control tumor spheres (Fig. 6B and C). The tumor spheres were also treated with the CK2 inhibitor, CX-4945. We determined that inhibiting CK2 activity also reduced beta-catenin protein expression 3-fold and reduced the transcriptional activity of beta-catenin as measured by the Wnt/beta-catenin GFP reporter by 2- to 6-fold (Fig. 6D and E). Consistently,OCT4andNANOGmRNA expression was also decreased 2- to 3-fold (Fig. 6F). To confirm these findings, we analyzed an additional tumor sphere cell line (TS #2). Consistent with our previous results we discovered a dose-dependent response to CX-4945 in the TS#2 spheres resulting in a 5-fold reduction of beta-catenin expression and a 5- to 10-fold reduction inNANOGandOCT4expression (Supplemental Fig. S4A and B). To determine if CK2alpha plays an important role in BTIC we first determined if CK2alpha inhibition reduced the number of BTIC in our tumor spheres by analyzing the GBM stem cell marker CD133. Upon CX-4945 treatment we observed a shift in the FACS profiles indicating that the subpopulation of CD133+ cells was reduced ~80% (Fig. 7A). Since CD133 is still a controversial GBM stem cell marker, we also analyzed an additional freshly dissociated GBM tumor sphere line (passage less than 5) for additional neural stem cell markers: CD15, A2B5, CD49f, and CD90 (26)(Fig. 7B). Our FACS analysis showed that in low passage tumor spheres both 5muM and 10muM CX-4945 treatment reduced the CD15+ subpopulation by ~50% and A2B5+ cells by ~70% (Fig. 7B). We also observed a decrease in the CD49f+ and CD90+ cells by 22% and 23%, respectively (Supplemental Fig 5). Consistent with our previous data the low passage tumor spheres had a reduction in CD133+ cells (Supplemental Fig. 4). To determine if the decrease in GBM stem cell markers was functionally significant we analyzed stem cell phenotypes in our tumor spheres transduced with shRNA to CK2alpha. We discovered that the shCK2alpha+Dox tumor spheres had a significantly reduced size compared with the shCK2alpha-Dox spheres (Fig. 7C). In addition, decreasing CK2alpha expression reduced the number of tumor spheres that formed, ~2-fold compared with the shCK2alpha-Dox tumor spheres, and ~10-fold when treated with the CK2 inhibitors, TBBz or CX-4945 (Fig. 7D). We also determined the frequency of sphere-initiating cells by performing a limited dilution assay (LDA)(27). The shCK2alpha+Dox tumor spheres had a significant decrease in thein vitrosphere-forming capacity of the cells (1/3,432) compared with the shCK2alpha-Dox tumor spheres (1/301) or the uninfected spheres treated with Dox (1/301) (P= 0.009) (Fig. 7E). We also consistently discovered a dose-dependent effect when the tumor spheres were cultured with CX-4945. Compared with the DMSO control (1/83), 5 muM CX-4945 reduced the sphere forming capacity of the spheres 13-fold (1/1,100), while 10 muM had a 200-fold reduction (1/16,884) (P= 0.005 andP= 0.0007) (Fig. 7E). To verify our findings, we analyzed the TS #2 cell line and determined that the sphere-forming capacity was reduced in the CX-4945 (1/1846) and TBBz treated spheres (1/1250) compared to the DMSO control spheres (1/30)(P = 0.0002) (Supplemental Fig. S4C). We also determined that the TS#2 spheres had reduced proliferation and sphere size when treated with CX-4945 (Supplemental Fig. S4D and E). These findings are consistent with our work and provide additional support showing that CK2alpha plays an integral role in maintaining BTIC growth. Recent evidence suggests that CK2 is involved in maintaining a subpopulation of cells in the tumor that is responsible for initiating and maintaining tumor growth. This BTIC subpopulation is capable of self-renewal, asymmetric division, and multi-lineage differentiation (28;29), and current evidence suggests that it is necessary (and sufficient) to eradicate BTICs for therapeutic efficacy in multiple forms of cancer (30;31). Here we demonstrate for the first time that decreasing CK2alpha expression or reducing its activity through small molecule inhibitors decreases the BTIC subpopulation in GBM. Using GBM tumor spheres derived from patients, we determined that loss of CK2alpha resulted in a decrease inOCT4andNANOG, two beta-catenin-regulated genes associated with BTICs (23). Oct4 was shown to play an essential role in maintaining the stem cell properties of BTIC through Sox2 expression (32), while NANOG modulated GBM stem cell clonogenicity and proliferation (33). The loss of these BTIC regulators resulted in a loss of GBM "stemness" as evident through the decrease in tumor sphere size, growth, and sphere-forming capacity (Figure 8). Together, our findings show for the first time that targeting CK2alpha not only decreases GBM tumorigenicity, but can also deplete the BTIC subpopulation making it an intriguing therapeutic target for GBM. The mechanism by which CK2alpha can regulate beta-catenin activity has been well studied in other tumor types, but is currently unknown in GBM. In vitromapping studies identified the Thr393 site in the central armadillo repeat domain of beta-catenin as a key site regulating beta-catenin proteasomal-dependent degradation (34). Additionally, CK2alpha was shown to regulate beta-catenin indirectly. CK2alpha was found to phosphorylate and inhibit AKT/protein kinase B, known activators of beta-catenin (35;36), and phosphorylate alpha-catenin at Ser641 thereby preventing the inhibitory effects of alpha-catenin on beta-catenin (37). These studies suggest that CK2alpha may positively regulate beta-catenin activity directly or indirectly, but additional studies are needed to determine the exact mechanism by which CK2alpha can regulate beta-catenin activity in BTICs. While we demonstrated that CK2alpha can regulate beta-catenin, there are other pathways that CK2alpha could potentially regulate in maintaining BTICs. For instance, CK2alpha has been linked to the hedgehog (HH)/Gli1 and Notch pathways. The HH pathway was shown to regulate self-renewal, growth, and survival of BTIC (38), and regulate key factors in maintaining GBM tumor initiating cells including: Bmi1 (39-41) and ABCG2 (42). Notch signaling was also shown to play critical roles in GBM stem cell survival and self-renewal (43-45). Interestingly, CK2alpha was shown to regulate both pathways in lung cancer. Inhibition of CK2alpha using small molecule inhibitors reduced expression and activity of Gli1, which altered ABCG2 expression that led to a reduction in the BTIC-like side population in lung cancer cells (46). Decreasing CK2alpha expression using siRNA resulted in a reduction in Notch transcriptional activity that resulted in a reduction in the stem cell subpopulation (47). These reports combined with our findings suggest that CK2alpha may influence multiple pathways in GBM initiating cell maintenance suggesting that inhibition of CK2alpha could yield better therapeutic effects than using HH or Notch inhibitors alone. While a great deal of research has been conducted to generate a CK2alpha inhibitor for cancer therapy, there is only one molecule that is currently being tested for clinical trials. CX-4945 is a CK2alpha small molecule adenosine triphosphate-binding site inhibitor that possesses a high bioavailability and is currently in phase I clinical trials (48). Through our work and that of others, CX-4945 treatment has been shown to decrease cell adhesion, migration, and cell cycle progression, while also inducing apoptosis in immortalized and primary GBM samples (49). Past studies also demonstrate that CX-4945 treatment significantly inhibits tumor growth and increases median survival time when GBM cells are injected subcutaneously into the flank or intracranially in a mouse xenograft model (50). Our findings expand on these initial reports by demonstrating that CX-4945 could decrease GBM initiating cell growth and stemness through beta-catenin. We found that in GBM tumor spheres CX-4945 had a dose-dependent response resulting in a decrease in beta-catenin expression, beta-catenin-regulated genes (OCT4andNANOG), and GBM stemness. Taken together, our findings indicate that targeting CK2alpha using CX-4945 could be a powerful therapeutic treatment for GBM patients due to the role of CK2alpha in maintaining numerous pathways necessary for GBM tumorigenesis and BTIC growth. Additional clinical studies should be conducted to determine the efficacy of CX-4945 in GBM. The GBM cell lines U87-MG and U138 (American Type Culture Collection, Manassas, Virginia, USA) were cultured in Dulbecco's modified Eagle medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum and 2 mM L-glutamine. Cells were transfected using Effectene (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer's protocol. Tumor spheres were derived from primary GBMs and cultured in a tumor stem base medium previously shown to enrich for GBM stem cells (24). Our tumor sphere medium consisted of neurobasal medium containing B27-A, 20 ng/mL epidermal growth factor, 20 ng/mL basic fibroblast growth factor, and 20 mug/mL heparin. The seven GBM tissue samples were harvested from primary GBM patients and the tissue was immediately frozen in dry ice. The normal brain was harvested from temporal lobe of a patient undergoing anterior temporal lobectomy for removal of mesial temporal sclerosis. The tissue was immediately frozen in dry ice and later thawed for harvesting of protein lysate. For protein analysis, protein extracts from cells were harvested and immunoblotted as previously described (51). The following antibodies were used for immunoblotting: green fluorescent protein (GFP), CK2alpha, and glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) (all from Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA), and CK2beta (Millipore, Hayward, CA, USA). Chemiluminescence signals were quantitated using NIH Image J (National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA). U87-MG and U138 cells were transfected with 25 nM CK2alpha (#1027423, Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA), CK2beta (4390824 Ambion, Life Technologies, Austin, TX, USA) or non-target siRNA (4390843 Ambion, Austin, TX, USA) for 24 hours, using DharmaFECT transfection reagent 1 (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) according to the manufacturer's protocol. The lentiviral inducible shRNA plasmid, pTRIPZ, was used to express shRNA to the CK2alpha gene (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The retrovirus pMSCV-YPet was generated by subcloning YPet from the pCEP4-YPet plasmid into the pMSCV backbone (52). Retroviral infections were carried out as previously described except that the Phoenix-Ampho cell lines were used instead of HEK293 cells (51). Thirty-six hours after infection of the U87-MG or U138 cells, the cells were selected by culturing for 2 days in selective medium containing 0.5 mug/mL puromycin. The doxycycline inducible plasmid, pTRIPZ Retroviral shRNA, to CK2alpha was purchased commercially (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Retroviral infections were carried out as described above, but the packaging plasmids, psPAX2 and pMD2.G, were transfected into HEK293 cells in neurobasal medium. Thirty-six hours after infection, the cells were selected using 5mug/ml puromycin for 3 days. U87-MG- and U138-infected cells were plated in six-well plates (5 * 105cells per well) and cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 2 mM L-glutamine, and 100 units per ml penicillin/streptomycin. The number of live cells was counted at the specified times by means of trypan blue exclusion assay. Four sets of cells were counted per time point. Upon treatment with CK2 inhibitors (CX-4945 and TBBz), DMSO was used as a vehicle control. The amount of DMSO that was added was equal to the highest concentration of the drug, resulting in a final DMSO concentration of 0.01%. Experiments were done in triplicate and results are expressed as mean +/- SD. To determine if the growth was statistically significant we used the Mann-Whitney U test. Tumor spheres were plated in a 96-well plate (100 cells per well) and cultured as described previously. After 14 days the number of spheres that formed were counted per well. Experiments were done in triplicate and results are expressed as mean +/- SD. The Mann-Whitney U test was conducted to determine statistical significance. U87-MG-infected cells were plated in six-well plates (3 * 105cells per well) and suspended in DMEM as previously described (51). The presence of colonies was scored after 10 days using Genetools software (Syngene, Los Altos, CA, USA). Experiments were done in triplicate and results are expressed as mean +/- SD. The Mann-Whitney U test was conducted to determine statistical significance. All specimens were accrued and evaluated under institutional review board (IRB)-approved protocols. Total RNA from each cell line was extracted using Trizol reagent (Promega, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer's protocol. The reverse transcription and quantitative PCR (QPCR) were carried out using the Brilliant II Syber Green QRT-PCR Master Mix Kit according to the manufacturer's protocol (Stratagene, Santa Clara, CA, USA). Primers were designed specifically for theCK2genes and the specificity was verified by sequencing. Their sequences were: CK2alpha (forward), 5'-GGTTGTATGCTGGCAAGTATGA-3'; CK2alpha (reverse), 5'-TCGAGAGTGTCTGCCCAAGAT-3'; CK2beta (forward), 5'-TGAGCAGGTCCCTCACTACC-3'; CK2beta (reverse), 5'-GTAGCGGGCGTGGATCAAT-3'; Nanog (forward), 5'-ACCAGAACTGTGTTCTCTTCCACC -3'; Nanog (reverse), 5'-CCATTGCTATTCTTCGGCCAGTTG-3'; and Oct4 (forward), 5'-GGAAGGTATTCAGCCAAACGACCA-3'; Oct4 (reverse), 5'-CTCACTCGGTTCTCGATACTGGTT -3'; glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) (forward) 5'-GTCCACCACCCTGTTGCTGTA-3'; GAPDH (reverse) 5'-ACCACAGTCCATGCCATC-3'. Relative copy number was determined using the comparativeCtmethod. GAPDH served as the normalizing control. The Mann-Whitney U test was conducted to determine statistical significance. Following digestion of primary tumor to single cells, the single cells were plated at limiting dilutions or at a density of 100 cells per well. Cells were cultured in neurobasal medium containing B27-A, epidermal growth factor, basic fibroblast growth factor, and heparin. For estimation of sphere initiating cell frequency, limiting dilution analysis (LDA) was done as described previously (53). Cultures were carried out for 14 days and scored for wells that did not have spheres. An extreme LDA algorithm was used to determine the frequency of sphere initiating cells (27). Each experiment was done in triplicate and analyzed using 2-sidedttests. To determine sphere growth, 100 cells per well were plated and the cultures were carried out for 14 days. The number of spheres per well was counted and analyzed using 2-sidedttests. Cells were resuspended in a 1:1 mixture of cold PBS and Matrigel (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA, USA) and adjusted to the appropriate concentration. One hundred microliters of the cell suspension was injected into the cortex of 6- to 8-week-old NOD scid gamma mice. Mice were sacrificed at 10 and 40 days and the tumors were extracted. Tumor size after injection was analyzed by fixing the tumors in paraformaldehyde, sectioning, and staining with hematoxylin and eosin. The mice were sacrificed under approved Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee protocols. TBB, TBBz, and CX-4945 (Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA) were used in inhibitor studies at the following concentrations for the specified time: 10 to 100 muM (TBB), 6 to 25 muM (TBBz), and 1 to 10 muM (CX-4945). Typically, U87-MG and U138 cells were incubated for 5 days with each compound and then analyzed. Fifty percent of the medium was replaced every 3 days with fresh medium containing treatment compounds at the original concentrations. Controls were treated with the vehicle control, dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO; Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA). The amount of DMSO added was equal to the highest concentration of drug, resulting in a final concentration of 0.01%. Before flow cytometry analysis or sorting, cells were dissociated as described above or washed and dissociated using TrypLE (Gibco, Carlsbad, CA, USA). Cells were resuspended in a 100muL staining volume of fluorescence activated cell sorting (FACS) buffer (Hanks' balanced salt solution + 0.1% bovine serum albumin) and kept on ice. The following antibodies were used: CD133/1, and CD133/2 biotin (Miltenyi Biotech, San Diego, CA, USA), CD90 (Biolegend, San Diego, CA, USA), CD15 (BD Bioscience, San Jose, CA, USA), CD49f (BD Bioscience, San Jose, CA, USA), AB25 (Miltenyi Biotech, San Diego, CA, USA) and PE-CY7 strep (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA, USA). All analyses were conducted using a LSR II FACS machine (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA, USA) or sorted on an ARIA-II (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA, USA) at the Stanford University FACS facility. Appropriate isotype controls were used to control for nonspecific isotype background. The Kaplan Meier survival curve for GBM was derived using the National Cancer Institute REMBRANDT and the TCGA data source. The GBM patients were separated into high or low CK2alpha expression and graphed according to patient survival. The survival curves were derived using thehttp://genepyramid.stanford.edu/microarray/Explore/and the R2: microarray analysis and visualization platform (http://r2.amc.nl). A log-rank test was used to determine the p value. Two GBM tumor panels and one normal brain panel used the Affymetrix U133 Plus 2.0 Microarray analysis to analyze mRNA expression in primary samples. Hegi et al. (2008) analysis contained 84 GBM samples derived from primary tumors and Lee et al. (2006) contained 101 primary GBM samples (19;54). The normal brain gene expression profile contained 173 samples for different regions in the brain including the hippocampus, entorhinal cortex, superior frontal gyrus, and postcentral gyrus. The expression data were normalized with the MAS5.0 algorithm within the Affymetrix's GCOS program. All data were analyzed using the R2 bioinformatic tool (http://r2.amc.nl). The expression was transformed to 2log and graphed as a boxplot. The single factor analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used to compare the means of the different groups and determined the statistical significance. Supplemental Figure 1. Expression of CK2alpha in GBM patients. A) Boxplot representing the relative expression of CK2alpha from three different microarray sources. The Mixed samples of GBM had 101 patient samples, while there were 72 samples from primary GBM patients. The control was a microarray derived from 172 samples of normal brain. B) The Survival curve from analysis of TCGA for three subtype of GBM patients (classical, neural, proneural) separated by high or low expression of CK2alpha. Supplemental Figure 2. Reducing expression or inhibiting CK2alpha activity decreased GBM tumorigenesis in U138 cells. A, cell growth analysis of U138 cells transfected with siRNA. The cell lines were cultured in 10% fetal bovine serum and viable cells were counted daily. Results are from two separate experiments, each done in triplicate. B, cell growth analysis of U138 cells treated with CK2 inhibitors TBB or TBBz. C, QPCR analysis of beta-catenin-responsive genes. Supplemental Figure 3. Tumor spheres with elevated levels CK2alpha expression may lead to a worse prognosis for GBM patients. A, FACS analysis showing the sorted subpopulation of CD133+ and CD133- tumor spheres. B. FACS analysis for CD15+ and CD15- tumor spheres. C, QPCR analysis of sorted tumor spheres for CK2alpha or CK2beta mRNA expression. *represents a statistically significant change from the control, P less than 0.05, as measured by the Mann-Whitney U testSupplemental Figure 4. Reducing CK2alpha expression decreases beta-catenin expression and activity in a second tumor sphere line (TS #2) derived from GBM patients. A, Western blot showing protein expression after tumor spheres were treated with CX-4945. B, QPCR analysis of beta-catenin-responsive genes after treatment with CK2 inhibitor. C, LDA of tumor spheres treated with varying concentrations of CX-4945. Red represents DMSO-treated spheres, black represents spheres treated with 10muM CX-4945 and green represents spheres treated with 25muM TBBz. D, tumor sphere formation capacity was monitored by plating 100 cells and counting the number of spheres that formed after 14 days. E,Left, tumor sphere size after treatment with 10uM of CX-4945. Right, representative image of tumor spheres. *represents a statistically significant change from the control, P less than 0.05, as measured by the Mann-Whitney U testSupplemental Figure 5. CK2alpha activity is important for maintaining the GBM stem cells. FACS analysis of CD133+, CD90+, CD49f+ cells in low passage ( less than 5) tumor spheres treated with 5muM and 10muM of CX-4945. Left, histogram of FACS profile. Right, Mean Fluorescence Intensity (MFI) of each treatment.