Why beta-cells fail in type 2 diabetes is a question of intense interest. Abnormalities in islet cholesterol metabolism have recently emerged as a potential contributor to beta-cell dysfunction (1). Type 2 diabetes frequently co-occurs with abnormalities of plasma lipoproteins, and "diabetic dyslipidemia" is characterized by low levels of HDL cholesterol and elevated triglycerides (2). Low HDL cholesterol is a risk factor for the development of type 2 diabetes (3) and is inversely correlated with beta-cell function in patients with type 2 diabetes (4), suggesting that abnormalities of plasma lipids may affect the pathogenesis of this disease. Elevated plasma cholesterol levels induce islet cholesterol accumulation in mice (5-7), and exposure of beta-cells to high levels of cholesterol causes dysfunction and death (6-8). In mice fed a high-fat diet, accumulation of cholesterol in islets was recently shown to discriminate between mice that do and do not develop diabetes (9). Conversely, infusion of HDL cholesterol in humans improves beta-cell function (10). Together, these data provide compelling evidence that cholesterol metabolism plays an important and previously unrecognized role in beta-cell function. We identified ATP-binding cassette transporter A1 (ABCA1) as a key molecule in islet cholesterol metabolism (5). ABCA1 mediates the rate-limiting step in HDL biogenesis in humans: the efflux of cellular cholesterol and phospholipids. In mice, the targeted deletion ofABCA1in beta-cells leads to islet cholesterol accumulation, impaired nutrient-stimulated insulin secretion, and markedly impaired glucose tolerance (5). Moreover, humans heterozygous for mutations inABCA1have impaired beta-cell function (11). Models of ABCA1 deficiency offer a unique opportunity to understand the role of cholesterol metabolism in diabetes. The specific mechanisms by which ABCA1 and islet cholesterol metabolism influence beta-cell function are unknown. In this study, we show that ABCA1 deficiency in beta-cells leads to reduced insulin granule exocytosis, altered microdomain organization and Golgi ultrastructure, and impaired proinsulin processing. ABCA1beta-cell-specific knockout and controlABCA1floxed mice have been described previously (5). Mice were bred to a pure C57Bl6 background as described previously (12). All studies were approved by the University of British Columbia Animal Care Committee. Intraperitoneal glucose tolerance tests, islet isolation, glucose-stimulated insulin secretion, and islet cholesterol measurements were performed as described previously (5,6). Plasma proinsulin levels were measured using the rat/mouse proinsulin ELISA kit (Mercodia, Uppsala, Sweden) (13). For cholesterol efflux measurements, islets were loaded with 1 muCi/mL [3H]cholesterol overnight. Islets were then washed and incubated in RPMI 1640 medium containing 0.1% BSA, with or without 10 mug/mL human apolipoprotein A-I (apoA-I) (Athens Research and Technology, Athens, GA), for 4 h. Medium was collected, and cells were lysed in 0.1 N NaOH/0.1% SDS. Radioactivity in samples was measured by scintillation counting. Cholesterol efflux is expressed as a percentage of counts in medium over total (medium plus islets) counts. Islets were dispersed and imaged as described previously (14). Cytosolic Ca2+was imaged in Fura-2-acetoxymethyl-loaded cells. Area under the curve was measured over the first 10 min of 10 mmol/L glucose, the first 5 min of 100 mumol/L tolbutamide, and the first 5 min of 30 mmol/L KCl perfusion. Cells that failed to raise the 340:380 ratio 2 SDs above the baseline within 5 min after treatment with 10 mmol/L glucose were excluded from the analysis. Ca2+current recordings were made in the whole-cell configuration of the patch-clamp technique from isolated beta-cells. Recordings were digitized at 20 KHz and filtered at 5 KHz using the Axopatch200B patch-clamp amplifier and Clampex 8.0 (Molecular Devices Corp., Union City, CA). Bath perfusate contained (in mmol/L): NaCl, 95; CsCl, 5; MgCl2, 0.6; BaCl2, 20; HEPES, 5; glucose, 10; tetraethylammonium-Cl, 20; and 0.0005 tetrodotoxin (pH adjusted to 7.4 with NaOH, 21-24 degrees C). Patch pipettes were pulled from borosilicate glass (GB150-86-15; Sutter Instrument Co., Novato, CA) to yield resistances between 1.7 and 2.0 MOmega when backfilled with buffer solution. Pipette tips were filled with a buffer solution containing (in mmol/L): CsCl, 120; tetraethylammonium-Cl, 20; MgCl2, 2; EGTA, 10; HEPES, 10; and ATP, 2 (pH adjusted to 7.2 with CsOH). Cells were voltage-clamped at -80 mV, and whole-cell capacitance was determined from analog compensation. Series resistance compensation of 80-90% was applied. To evoke total whole-cell Ca2+currents, cells were hyperpolarized to -90 mV (200-ms duration) and then depolarized to 10 mV (250-ms duration). Leak subtraction was applied using a p/5 protocol. K+current recordings were performed with an EPC10 patch-clamp amplifier controlled with PatchMaster software (HEKA Electronik, Lambrecht, Germany) as described previously (15). Data were analyzed using FitMaster (HEKA Electronik) and SigmaPlot 10 software (Systat Software, Inc., Point Richmond, CA). Capacitance measurements were performed as described previously (16). Whole-cell capacitance responses were normalized to initial cell size and expressed as femtofarad per picofarad. Islet cells were dispersed and plated on glass coverslips. Cells were loaded with 8 umol/L FM1-43 in voltage-dependent K+(Kv) bath solution (as described above) for 10 min at 37 degrees C. Cells were then imaged on an upright epifluorescence microscope (Olympus Canada, Inc., Markham, ON, Canada) at original magnification *10. Fluorescence emission was measured at 520 nm after excitation at 480 nm at a rate of 0.33 frames/min. Cells were bathed in Kvbath solution at 37 degrees C, and 1 mol/L KCl was added to adjust the final concentration of KCl to 25 mmol/L as indicated. Islets were cultured in Hams' F-10 medium containing 10% (v/v) FBS and 6 mmol/Ld-glucose and high-pressure frozen, freeze substituted, processed, and plastic embedded, essentially as described previously (17). Ribbons of thin (40-60-nm) sections were cut on a microtome for survey at 80-100 keV to assess the quality of islet freeze preservation on Tecnai T12 (FEI Company, Hillsboro, OR) or JEOL 1011 (JEOL Australia, Frenchs Forest, NSW, Australia) microscopes. Sample grids were viewed on the electron microscope at appropriate magnification and digital images captured at random to ensure an unbiased analysis/quantification. After capturing or freezing each image (or in live mode), an appropriate imaging grid (e.g., 1,000 * 1,000 nm) stored as a macro program in the camera/image analysis software was overlaid onto the image field. Points at which the grid lines intersected were counted for the cytoplasm versus other organelles compartments such as mitochondria, digestive/autophagic structures, and mature insulin granules. The relative volume of a given compartment in the cell was calculated by measuring the ratio of points over the compartment of interest/points over the cytoplasm, expressed as a percentage of cytoplasmic volume occupied by that compartment. MIN6 cells were lysed in 170 uL ice-cold 2-(N-morpholino)ethanesulfonic acid (Mes)-buffered saline (25 mmol/L Mes, 150 mmol/L NaCl, pH 6.5) containing 0.25% Triton X-100 and protease inhibitor mix and incubated at 4 degrees C for 30 min. The lysate was homogenized with 20 strokes of a Dounce homogenizer. Equal amounts of protein in 150 uL were added to an equal volume of 80% (w/v) sucrose and overlayed with 300 uL of 30% sucrose and 225 uL of 5% sucrose. After centrifugation at 54,000 rpm in a Beckman TLS-55 rotor (Beckman Coulter, Inc., Fullerton, CA) for 20 h, 70-muL fractions were collected from the top of the gradient and designated fractions number 1 (top) through 11 (bottom). For epidermal growth factor (EGF) signaling, islets were incubated in RPMI 1640 medium with 0.5% BSA overnight, stimulated with 50 ng/mL EGF for 20 min, and lysed in SDP+buffer (50 mM Tris pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 1% Igepal, 40 mM B-glycerophosphate, 10 mM NaF, 1* Roche complete protease inhibitor, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, and 800 muM PMSF) after washing. Equivalent amounts of total protein (30 mug) or equal volumes (lipid rafts) were immunoblotted as previously described (6) using antibodies to flotillin (BD Transduction Laboratories, Mississauga, ON, Canada), synaptosomal-associated protein-25 (Covance, Princeton, NJ), transferrin receptor (Invitrogen, Burlington, ON, Canada), AKT and pAKT (Ser-473; Cell Signaling, Beverly, MA), vesicle-associated membrane protein 2 (VAMP-2), syntaxin-4, syntaxin-1, and actin (Abcam, Cambridge, MA). Protein bands were analyzed by densitometry using Quantity One (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA) or ImageJ software (National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD). Data are presented as means +/- SE. Differences between groups were calculated by the Studentttest for two groups or one-way ANOVA with the Newman-Keuls post-test for three groups, withP= 0.05 considered significant. Previous studies of mice with beta-cell deletion ofABCA1(ABCA1-P/-Pmice) were performed on a mixed C57Bl6/129SvEV background (5). Because background strain may influence glucose metabolism and insulin secretion (18), we first confirmed that the insulin secretory defect in mice carrying theABCA1-null mutation was maintained on a pure C57Bl6 background. Lack of beta-cellABCA1in C57Bl6 mice resulted in impaired glucose tolerance (Fig. 1None) and insulin secretion (Fig. 1None) at age 4 months, consistent with previous data on a mixed background (5). Islets lacking beta-cellABCA1also had impaired cholesterol efflux toward apoA1 (Fig. 1None). In addition, islets isolated fromABCA1-P/-Pmice had increased cholesterol levels (Fig. 1None). These data indicate that the phenotype observed in mice lacking beta-cellABCA1on a mixed background persists on a pure C57Bl6 background strain. Mice lacking beta-cellABCA1show impaired glucose tolerance, impaired insulin secretion, impaired islet cholesterol efflux, and increased islet cholesterol levels. A: Plasma glucose levels during glucose tolerance test (n= 5). B: Glucose-stimulated insulin secretion from isolated islets. Values represent pooled data from three separate experiments; each consisted of pooled islets from three mice per genotype, and values are expressed as percent of islet content relative to basal secretion, which is arbitrarily set to 1. C: Cholesterol efflux toward apoA1. Values represent pooled data from three separate experiments. D: Islet cholesterol levels (n= 4). ***P less than 0.001 compared with controls. Glucose stimulates insulin secretion by inducting electrical activity, Ca2+influx, and subsequent Ca2+-dependent exocytosis of insulin-containing granules (19). Studies show that cholesterol loading of cultured beta-cells results in decreased glucose-stimulated Ca2+influx (7,20). To determine whether cholesterol accumulation due to lack ofABCA1in beta-cells influences Ca2+influx, we measured intracellular calcium ([Ca2+]i) levels by Fura-2 acetoxymethyl imaging in single beta-cells. At 3 mmol/L glucose, we noted a modest increase in basal [Ca2+]iinABCA1-deficient beta-cells (Table 1). The shapes of the glucose-stimulated [Ca2+]iincreases were qualitatively similar in beta-cells from control andABCA1-P/-Pmice (Fig. 2None). Total [Ca2+]iwas modestly decreased in beta-cells lackingABCA1upon stimulation with 10 mmol/L glucose or depolarization with KCl or tolbutamide, the KATPchannel inhibitor (Table 1), indicating that the calcium influx defect arises from perturbations downstream of glucose sensing and metabolic pathways. Quantification of calcium imaging of dispersed beta-cells isolated from control andABCA1-P/-PmiceData are presented as mean +/- SE. Ca2+influx and ion channel activity unaltered in beta-cells lackingABCA1. A: Influence of 10 mmol/L glucose and 100 mumol/L tolbutamide (Tol) on [Ca2+]i. [Ca2+]iwas monitored as the 340:380 nm fluorescence ratio. Representative traces of individual beta-cells are shown. B: Ca2+current density from beta-cells:i) representative current density recording andii) voltage clamp protocol used to elicit Ca2+currents. C: Group data for control (n= 14) andABCA1-P/-P(n= 11) mice for peak current density, mean current density measured during the last 10 ms of the depolarization step (End), and total Ca2+current density for entire depolarization step measured as area under the curve (AUC). D: K+current density from beta-cells:i) representative current density recording andii) voltage clamp protocol used to elicit K+currents. E: Group data for control (n= 8) andABCA-P/-Pmice (n= 7) during different voltages. At the plasma membrane, Ca2+influx via voltage-dependent Ca2+channels (VDCCs) is the major trigger for insulin granule exocytosis (21). A recent report suggested that cholesterol enrichment induced a decrease in VDCC-mediated extracellular Ca2+influx in isolated beta-cells (20). Therefore, we measured calcium current density by whole-cell patch clamp studies but observed no difference in the magnitude of currents between control andABCA1-deficient beta-cells (Fig. 2NoneandNone). Furthermore, the activity of Kvchannels, which has been implicated in the repolarization of beta-cell membrane potential leading to the closure of VDCCs and has been shown to be sensitive to changes in cholesterol levels (20,22), was similar between control andABCA1-deficient beta-cells (Fig. 2NoneandNone). Although the modest changes in depolarization-evoked [Ca2+]icould lead to some reduction in insulin secretion, the lack of significant change in VDCC and Kvchannel activity suggests the existence of additional defects downstream of Ca2+influx that contribute to the impaired insulin secretion in beta-cells lackingABCA1. To investigate whether a distal exocytotic defect may be present in beta-cells lackingABCA1, we performed FM1-43 destaining and whole-cell membrane capacitance measurements. Both methods quantify the plasma membrane surface area, which transiently increases each time a granule undergoes exocytosis and is incorporated into the membrane. A stepwise membrane depolarization from -70 to 0 mV activates VDCCs and thereby triggers the exocytotic fusion of secretory vesicles with the plasma membrane. Depolarization of the membrane led to similar Ca2+currents in control andABCA1-null beta-cells (Fig. 3None). Whereas depolarization led to increased capacitance in control beta-cells, this effect was markedly impaired in beta-cells lackingABCA1(Fig. 3None). Furthermore, KCl-induced exocytosis (as measured by FM1-43 destaining) was profoundly reduced inABCA1-null beta-cells (Fig. 3None). FM1-43 has been extensively used for monitoring insulin granule exocytosis (23-25), although it should be noted that FM1-43 may also label synaptic-like microvesicles, which also undergo Ca2+-dependent exocytosis (26). Nonetheless, these data suggest an exocytotic defect inABCA1-deficient beta-cells that probably contributes to impaired insulin secretion. Depolarization-induced exocytosis is impaired in beta-cells lackingABCA1. A: beta-Cell membrane capacitance (Cm) and voltage-dependent Ca2+currents (ICa) in response to a single 500-ms depolarization. B: The average exocytotic response, normalized to initial cell size (n= 40-58). C: FM1-43 destaining in response to 30 mmol/L KCl inABCA1+/+(n= 23, ?) andABCA1-P/-P(n= 24, ?) beta-cells. AU, arbitrary unit. D: Capacitance measurements after a series of membrane depolarizations of progressively increasing duration. E: The average responses ofABCA1+/+(n= 40, ?) andABCA1-P/-P(n= 58, ?) beta-cells. *P less than 0.05, **P less than 0.01, and ***P less than 0.001 compared with controls. To determine whetherABCA1deficiency might uncouple VDCC activity from insulin granule exocytosis, we measured capacitance during prolonged membrane depolarization, causing a more global Ca2+increase and a reduction in the requirement for direct VDCC-granule coupling. The change in capacitance ofABCA1-deficient beta-cells during prolonged depolarization was severely blunted (Fig. 3NoneandNone). These data indicate that beta-cells lackingABCA1fail to translate the chemical signal of elevated cellular calcium into exocytotic events. These data also suggest that defective granule exocytosis in beta-cells lackingABCA1is downstream of Ca2+entry into the beta-cell. Defective granule exocytosis after Ca2+entry could result from a paucity of secretory granules available at the plasma membrane, impaired granule assembly or transport, or alterations in the exocytotic machinery at the plasma membrane. To investigate the possibility of reduced availability of insulin-containing granules, we performed detailed quantitative electron microscopic analysis of beta-cells in islets isolated fromABCA1-P/-Pand control mice. We observed no significant differences in the cytoplasmic density of mature insulin granules (Supplementary Table 1) or the number of insulin granules close ( less than 100 nm) to the plasma membrane between beta-cells fromABCA1-P/-Pand control mice (Fig. 4NoneandNone). Availability of granules at the plasma membrane is therefore unlikely to explain the secretory defect inABCA1-deficient islets. beta-Cells lackingABCA1show similar number of docked granules. A: Representative electron micrographs. Insert shows docked granules at the plasma membrane in more detail. B: The percentage of secretory granules localized to the plasma membrane ( less than 100 nm) withinABCA1+/+andABCA1-P/-Pbeta-cells (n= 13-19). (A high-quality color representation of this figure is available in the online issue.) Although the number of insulin granules was preserved, the ultrastructure of mature insulin granules in beta-cells of mice lackingABCA1was more heterogeneous with respect to mean diameter (Supplementary Fig. 1NoneandNone), indicating that mechanisms that regulate insulin granule biogenesis at the Golgi are disrupted by lack of beta-cellABCA1. Indeed, Golgi cisternae fromABCA1-deficient beta-cells (Fig. 5NoneandNone) appeared more tightly stacked and demonstrated increased lateral continuity resulting in a more ordered architecture of the Golgi ribbon compared with those of control beta-cells (Fig. 5NoneandNone). Moreover, there was an increased tendency of regions of the Golgi ribbon to form circular organization in beta-cells lackingABCA1. Circular Golgi organization has previously been reported in kidney cells in which protein exit and membrane traffic out of the Golgi was blocked by incubation at 20 degrees C (27). Collectively, these observations indicate that islet cholesterol accumulation accompanying loss ofABCA1leads to fundamental alterations of Golgi structure that would be expected to impair membrane trafficking and carrier formation and contribute to impaired exocytosis of insulin granules. Consistent with this,ABCA1-P/-Pmice showed increased plasma proinsulin levels after fasting compared withABCA1+/+mice (8.61 +/- 0.95 vs. 4.26 +/- 1.79 pmol/L,P= 0.03), but plasma insulin levels were unaltered (5). Major alterations to Golgi organization inABCA1-P/-Pbeta-cells. The Golgi region in beta-cells from control mice (Aand B) reflected the hallmark architecture of Golgi membranes organized as a series of "compact regions" of stacked cisternae connected laterally to form a ribbon. Golgi region in beta-cells fromABCA1-P/-Pmice (Cand D) demonstrated a tendency toward circular organization with more ordered and tightly stacked appearance, both at the level of increased cisternal stacking and increased lateral continuity along the length of the ribbon itself. GA, Golgi apparatus; M, mitochondrion; N, nucleus. Bars, 1 mum (except for inset, 500 nm). To investigate whether insulin granule fusion at the plasma membrane is also affected by the absence ofABCA1, we next examined the expression of several SNARE (solubleN-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor attachment protein receptor) proteins in islets isolated from control andABCA1-P/-Pmice. At the plasma membrane, insulin granules fuse to the plasma membrane by the pairing of SNARE proteins located on the granules and the plasma membrane (28). Protein levels of the major SNARE proteins-SNAP-25, VAMP-2, syntaxin-1, and syntaxin-4-were not significantly altered in islets isolated fromABCA1-P/-Pmice compared with control mice (Fig. 6None). Cholesterol accumulation alters membrane microdomain organization and impairs SNARE protein localization. A: SNAP-25, VAMP-2, syntaxin-1, and syntaxin-4 protein levels in isolated islets. Graphs represent pooled densitometric measurement of protein signal intensity from three separate experiments. Actin was used as the loading control. B: Representative Western blot of transferrin receptor (TfR), a marker for soluble fractions; flotillin, a marker for nonsoluble fractions; and SNAP-25 in lipid raft fractions of MIN6 cells treated with or without 2 mmol/L cholesterol (n= 2) for 30 min, followed by 10 mmol/L MbetaCD (n= 1) for an additional 30 min. Fractions 5-8 were designated as nonsoluble and band intensities quantified and expressed on theright panel. C: Representative Western blot of EGF-induced phosphorylation of AKT in isolated islets. Graphs represent pooled densitometric measurement of protein signal intensity from four separate experiments. **P less than 0.01 compared with controls. (A high-quality color representation of this figure is available in the online issue.) SNARE proteins are concentrated in cholesterol-dependent microdomains that have functional importance for exocytosis (22,29). Redistribution of SNARE proteins by depletion of membrane cholesterol has been shown to inhibit exocytosis and dopamine release from neuroendocrine cells, and conversely, is associated with elevated exocytic events and insulin secretion from HIT-T15 beta-cells (22,30). To examine whether elevated levels of cholesterol could modulate SNAP-25 distribution in beta-cells, MIN6 beta-cells were loaded with cholesterol, which increased the localization of SNAP-25 into lipid raft fractions. Subsequent cholesterol depletion with methyl-beta-cyclodextrin (MbetaCD) led to the redistribution of SNAP-25 out of the lipid raft fractions (Fig. 6None). Flotillin, a well-established marker of lipid rafts, followed a similar pattern after cholesterol loading and depletion, suggesting that these changes are not unique to proteins regulating exocytosis. EGF signaling, which is sensitive to changes in cholesterol-enriched microdomains (31,32), was measured to confirm changes in microdomain organization in beta-cells lackingABCA1. Beside their role in membrane trafficking, cholesterol-enriched microdomains are thought to be of particular importance for signal transduction (33-35). EGF-induced AKT phosphorylation was impaired in islets isolated fromABCA1-P/-Pmice (Fig. 6None). These data suggest that microdomain organization is altered inABCA1-deficient beta-cells, which would be expected to interfere with granule exocytosis. To determine whether elevated cellular cholesterol levels associated withABCA1deficiency are causally related to impaired exocytosis, we superfused cells directly with a low concentration of MbetaCD (10 mumol/L) to deplete cellular cholesterol before and during capacitance measurements (Fig. 7None). Change in capacitance in response to pipette dialysis of 200 nmol/L-free Ca2+was markedly blunted inABCA1-deficient beta-cells (Fig. 7NoneandNone). Notably, the exocytotic defect was completely rescued by co-infusion of MbetaCD. Likewise, the exocytotic response to sequential ten 500-ms depolarizations, which was blunted in theABCA1-null beta-cells, was entirely rescued by an acute (2-min) infusion of MbetaCD before the recording (Fig. 7NoneandNone). These findings indicate that acute depletion of cellular cholesterol rescues granule exocytosis and suggests that cholesterol accumulation itself, perhaps at or near the site of granule exocytosis, is responsible for the impaired exocytosis and insulin secretion inABCA1-deficient beta-cells. The exocytotic defect inABCA1-P/-Pbeta-cells is rescued by acute intracellular cholesterol depletion. A: Whole-cell membrane capacitance from beta-cells after intracellular dialysis with a low (10 mumol/L) concentration of MbetaCD to deplete cholesterol via the cell interior. B: Membrane capacitance during co-infusion of 200 nmol/L free-Ca2+together with 10 mumol/L MbetaCD or an equal concentration of DMSO. C: The total capacitance increase, normalized to initial cell size, at 200 s after Ca2+infusion (n= 13-16). D: The exocytotic response to a series of ten 500-ms depolarizations rescued inABCA1-P/-Pbeta-cells by intracellular cholesterol depletion. E: The cumulative capacitance response ofABCA1+/+(n= 21, ?) andABCA1-P/-Pbeta-cells dialyzed with DMSO (n= 23, ?) or 10 mumol/L MbetaCD (n= 20, ?). For clarity, theABCA1+/++ MbetaCD group is not shown, although this was not different from controls. *P less than 0.05 and **P less than 0.01 compared with controls. Here we show that lack ofABCA1in beta-cells disrupts insulin granule exocytosis and thereby leads to defective insulin secretion and abnormal glucose homeostasis. Depletion of intracellular cholesterol acutely rescued the exocytotic defect inABCA1-deficient beta-cells, showing that cholesterol accumulation is the major factor influencing impaired insulin secretion in beta-cells lackingABCA1. Importantly, the finding that cholesterol depletion rescues the exocytotic defect inABCA1-deficient beta-cells establishes elevated islet cholesterol as a common mechanism for the impaired insulin secretion that has been observed in numerous animal models that display elevated islet cholesterol, including diet-induced obesity (9),APOEdeficiency (6),LXRdeficiency (36),SCD1deficiency (37), andSREBP2overexpression (38). ABCA1-deficient beta-cells showed a severely blunted exocytotic response in whole-cell capacitance measurements, even during prolonged membrane depolarization or during direct infusion of free Ca2+, suggesting a functional defect downstream of Ca2+entry into the beta-cell. Because intracellular cholesterol depletion can very rapidly restore the exocytotic response, we propose that the action of ABCA1 is critical for maintaining local cholesterol homeostasis and the membrane environment required for correct membrane fusion events and insulin secretion. An increasing body of literature suggests that cholesterol is critically involved in membrane fusion and exocytosis. As a membrane component, cholesterol can contribute to the fusion process by modulating the physical properties of the membrane, such as fluidity and curvature (39). In model membranes, cholesterol has been shown to stimulate membrane fusion by promoting hemifusion (40), regulating syntaxin clustering (41), and inducing conformational changes of VAMP-2 (42). In Ca2+-triggered membrane fusion events, cholesterol contributes critical membrane curvature that lowers the energy barriers and promotes formation of fusion intermediates (43). Membrane cholesterol levels recently were shown to influence SNARE protein conformation patterns in neuroblastoma cells, affecting exocytosis (44) and indicating that regulation of membrane composition is essential for membrane fusion events and exocytosis. Lipid rafts have been implicated to play a role in insulin granule exocytosis in beta-cells, because syntaxin-1, SNAP-25, VAMP-2, and the voltage-sensitive Ca2+channel have been associated with cholesterol-enriched microdomains (22). We found that cholesterol loading increased the association of SNAP-25 with detergent-resistant membranes and that this was reversible by cholesterol depletion. In addition, we observed impaired signaling of the microdomain-sensitive EGF receptor pathway in beta-cells lackingABCA1. These findings suggest that in beta-cells, there is altered microdomain organization during cholesterol accumulation and that normal ABCA1 activity may be critical for proper microdomain organization within membranes. Whether loss ofABCA1affects microdomain organization only at the plasma membrane or also at the insulin granule membrane is currently unknown. Subcellular cholesterol distribution was recently reported to be important for insulin secretion in beta-cells (45). Loss of the ABC transporter G1 (ABCG1), which mediates the transport of cholesterol toward HDL (46), resulted in decreased insulin secretion (45), although islet cholesterol levels were unaffected. Interestingly, cholesterol content of insulin granules was reduced. Administration of exogenous cholesterol restored insulin secretion inABCG1-deficient cells. Together with our data, this suggests that precise regulation of cholesterol levels, both in the plasma membrane and in insulin granules, is crucial for insulin secretion. In addition to a possible impairment in granule fusion events, several other factors may contribute to the reduction in insulin secretion present inABCA1-deficient beta-cells. Calcium imaging revealed a small increase in basal [Ca2+]ilevels and a decrease in the depolarization-evoked [Ca2+]iincrease. Moderate elevations in basal [Ca2+]ido not influence exocytosis (47), but this finding could indicate altered calcium homeostasis. Cholesterol loading of beta-cells results in decreased calcium influx due to altered glucose metabolism (7,20). However, this seems not to be the mechanism responsible for the decreased glucose-evoked [Ca2+]iincrease in beta-cells lackingABCA1, because tolbutamide and KCl treatment also resulted in a decreased depolarization-evoked [Ca2+]iincrease. The observed changes in global Ca2+signals inABCA1-deficient beta-cells may be related to differences in Ca2+-induced Ca2+release or to other processes downstream of the VDCCs, because we found no difference in VDCC activity compared with control cells. In addition to functional changes, loss of beta-cellABCA1led to ultrastructural alterations in the Golgi apparatus and insulin granules. These changes may be attributable to altered cholesterol homeostasis. Cholesterol depletion affects Golgi organization and vesicle formation in enterocytes (48), and cholesterol loading of cultured cells results in Golgi vesiculation and inhibited exit from thetrans-Golgi network (49). In addition, loss ofABCA1resulted in structural alterations in the Golgi network in enterocytes and in platelets (50). Loss ofABCG1leads to decreased insulin granule cholesterol levels and also affects insulin granule morphology, which is reversed after cholesterol loading (45). Although changed Golgi ultrastructure inABCA1-deficient beta-cells did not affect the number of docked insulin granules or total islet insulin levels (5), proinsulin processing was affected, as indicated by the increased plasma proinsulin levels inABCA1-P/-Pmice. In addition, the changed Golgi ultrastructure could affect membrane organization and thereby possibly the fusion competency of the insulin granules. Diabetes frequently coexists with abnormalities of plasma lipoproteins. Diabetic dyslipidemia is characterized by low levels of HDL and small dense LDL and by elevated triglycerides. Low levels of HDL are a risk factor for the development of diabetes (3), and HDL levels are inversely correlated with beta-cell function in patients with type 2 diabetes (4), raising the question of whether low HDL may play a role in the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes. ABCA1 regulates the rate-limiting step in HDL biogenesis and is critical in beta-cell function and insulin secretion, suggesting that the low HDL level and impaired islet function observed in type 2 diabetes may share a common pathogenic mechanism. Lipid accumulation has been described in human islets, suggesting that cholesterol accumulation may occur in response to exposure to high levels of circulating lipids. Accumulation of cholesterol in islets was recently shown to differentiate between animals that become diabetic in response to high-fat feeding and those that do not (9), suggesting that islet cholesterol accumulation may be an important event in the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes via the mechanisms we have described here. Together, these data suggest that ABCA1 and islet cholesterol levels may be an important mechanistic link between the low HDL level that frequently occurs in type 2 diabetes and the hallmark beta-cell defect in this disorder. In summary, our data suggest that impaired insulin secretion resulting from lack ofABCA1in beta-cells may be attributed to defects at multiple levels: changes in membrane microdomain organization leading to redistribution of SNARE proteins, changes in [Ca2+]ilevels, and finally, changes in the Golgi ultrastructure leading to defects in insulin biosynthesis and processing, all of which may ultimately regulate vesicle fusion and insulin granule exocytosis. These data contribute to our understanding of the important role for cholesterol homeostasis in insulin secretion and glucose homeostasis.