SulfoglycolipidsNone)and cholesterol 3-sulfate (HSO3-Chol)None)-None)are components of the cell membrane of the animals of deuterostome lineage, echinoderms to vertebrates. However, little is known about the biological function of these acidic lipidsin vivo. We reported recently that isolated renal tubules prepared by collagenase treatment from rat kidney could serve as a tool for clarification of the physiological role of the proximal tubular sulfated amphiphiles. None)In this previous study, we observed that addition of gluconeogenic substrates to the medium significantly increased sulfate incorporation into HSO3-Chol, whereas that markedly suppressed the incorporation into longer chain sulfoglycolipids. None)These findings aroused our concern to investigate the effects of nutritional substrates in the medium on metabolism of sulfolipids in isolated renal tubules. The purpose of the present study is to compare the effects of a glycolytic (glucose) and a gluconeogenic substrate (glutamine) on metabolic turnover of sulfoamphiphiles in renal tubules prepared from rats fedad libitum. Male, 6-week-old Wistar rats (150-180 g body weight) were purchased from SEASCO (Saitama, Japan) and fed with standard rat chow and tap waterad libitum. The present study was carried out in accordance with the Teikyo University Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals, accredited by the Japanese Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology. Every effort was taken to minimize any pain or discomfort of animals used in experiments. Collagenase (type II fromClostridium histolyticum) was purchased from Sigma Aldrich Japan, Tokyo, Japan. Carrier-free H235SO4was obtained from DuPont NEN Research Products, Wilmington, DE, USA. BondElut C18 cartridges (100 mg of sorbent, Varian, Harbor City, USA) were prewashed sequentially with 1 ml portions of CH3OH, H2O, 0.1 M KCl and BondElut DEA (100 mg of sorbent) with 1 ml of H2O and CH3OH. Sulfate-free modified Krebs-Henseleit medium was made by replacing NaHCO3and MgSO4with triethanolamine-HCl buffer and MgCl2respectively. None)Proximal-rich tubules were isolated from rat kidneys according to the method of GuderNone),None)with slight modifications as described. None)Briefly, kidneys were removed from rats sacrificed under light ether anesthesia and the renal cortices cut out and minced with scissors. The minced tissue was digested with collagenase (1,700 U/g minced tissue in 10 ml) in the sulfate-free Krebs-Henseleit medium under pure oxygen gas phase with vigorous shaking (37 degrees C for 45 min). The dispersed tubules were washed in centrifuge and resuspended in a fresh medium. This preparation was used immediately for [35S]sulfate incorporation experiments as below. Protein was determined by the modified methodNone)of BradfordNone)using bovine serum albumin as the standard. The renal tubules together with control BSA was solubilized in 1 M NaOH by heating (80 degrees C, 1 h) prior to protein assay. The tubular suspension (up to 0.5 mg protein) was transferred to a 15 ml polypropylene tube with a cap, and incubated with the sulfate-free Krebs-Henseleit medium (final vol., 1 ml) containing 370 kBq of carrier-free H235SO4and the renal substrate (glucose or glutamine) at 37 degrees C for 90 min with gentle shaking under O2gas phase. Incubations were stopped by chilling in ice water, and then 0.9 ml of the suspensions were transferred to a microcentrifuge tube and tubules collected by short centrifugation. None)The extraction procedure for total lipids from the isolated tubules using mixtures of CHCl3/CH3OH/H2O was similar to those described. None)-None)In order to remove essentially all glycerophospholipids, the total lipid extract was treated with 0.2 M NaOH in CH3OH and neutralized. The fraction of total acidic lipids was prepared as follows: The crude alkali-resistant lipids were suspended in 1 ml of 0.1 M KCl by brief sonication and transferred to a C18 cartridge. The residual lipids in the tube were washed with two 2 ml portions of 0.1 M KCl, and applied to the cartridge. None)After eluting non-lipid compounds with 3 ml of H2O, the outlet of the C18 cartridge was connected tandem to the inlet of a DEA cartridge. The lipids adsorbed on the C18 cartridge were eluted with 2 ml of CH3OH. Finally, the acidic lipids retained on the DEA cartridge were procured by elution with 1 ml of 3% ammonia water in CH3OH and dried under nitrogen flow. An aliquot of the alkali-resistant total acidic lipids was used to determine the radioactivity by a liquid scintillation counter. The rest was separated by high-performance TLC (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) in a solvent system, CHCl3/CH3OH/CH3COCH3/CH3COOH/H2O (7:2:4:2:1, by vol.) and the distribution of incorporated radioactivities analyzed using BAS-1500 Bioimaging Analyzer (Fuji Film, Tokyo, Japan) (Fig. 1). The incorporation of [35S]sulfate into the individual sulfoamphiphiles increased linearly up to approximately 0.7 mg of tubular protein and 120 min of incubation. None)By addition of the35S-sulfated lipid mixture of known composition and radioactivity to the total lipid extract, the overall recovery (%) of individual sulfated lipids in this assay system was calculated as follows (mean+/-SD, n=6): HSO3-Chol (80.9+/-7.2); glucosyl sulfatide (SM4s-Glc) (73.9+/-5.2); galactosyl sulfatide with non-hydroxy fatty acid (SM4s-nh) (73.7+/-7.1) and with hydroxy fatty acid (SM4s-h) (67.4+/-6.8); lactosyl sulfatide (SM3) (85.5+/-6.6); gangliotriaosylceramide II3-sulfate (SM2a) (69.6+/-7.5); gangliotriaosylceramide II3,III3-bis-sulfate (SB2) (75.3+/-8.5); gangliotetraosylceramide II3,IV3-bis-sulfate (SB1a) (58.1+/-7.4). Compared with our previous study,None)the recovery of sulfolipids, especially long-chain sulfoglycolipids, was greatly improved by using BondElut (58.1-85.5%) instead of SepPAK (17.5-56.8%). This improvement could be attributed to the difference in amounts of sorbent in these cartridges, which are 100 mg in BondElut and 360 mg in SepPAK. Incorporation of [35S]sulfate into individual sulfolipids was corrected for the above recovery. For all figures, means and standard deviations were calculated. Statistical comparison of the two means was performed using unpaired Student'st-test. Fig. 2A shows dose dependency of glucose-induced sulfate incorporation into tubular sulfoglycolipids. At subphysiological serum concentrations, 1.25 to 2.5 mM, the curves could be classified into two groups, a high-glucose-sensitive and a low-glucose-sensitive. The former was characterized by two ganglio-series sulfoglycolipids, SM2a and SB1a, and a major renal sulfoglycolipid, SM4s-h. The latter consisted of relatively short sugar chain lipids, SM4s-nh, SM3, and a sulfated endproduct of SM2a, i.e. SB2. These stimulative effects were saturated at the concentrations higher than 2.5 mM. On the other hand, glucose had little effect on sulfate incorporation into SM4s-Glc at all concentrations determined. These results were confirmed in another set of our experiment where effect of glucose (5 mM) on sulfate incorporation into sulfolipids was examined (Table1, ratio 1). Glucose at the nearly physiological serum concentration (5 mM) significantly stimulated sulfate incorporation into all sulfoglycolipids except SM4s-Glc, among which the stimulatory effect was much more prominent in SM4s-h, SM2a and SB1a (Table1, ratio 1). As shown in Fig. 2B, effect of a gluconeogenic substrate, glutamine, on sulfoglycolipids turnover was a striking contrast to that of glucose (Fig. 2A). Sulfate incorporation into SM4s-Glc, which had not been affected by glucose, was stimulated most prominently by glutamine at the concentrations higher than 0.156 mM. Incorporation into SM4s-nh, which classified to the low-glucose-sensitive group (Fig. 2A), also markedly increased in the presence of glutamine as a renal substrate. On the other hand, little effect was observed for SM2a and SB1a which belong to the high-glucose-sensitive group. These results were confirmed in Table1(ratio 2 and ratio 3). Similar to the sulfoglycolipids, the effect of gluconeogenic substrate (glutamine) on incorporation of sulfate into HSO3-Chol was quite different from that of the glycolytic substrate (glucose) (Fig. 3). Glutamine (up to 0.625 mM) dramatically increased the sulfate incorporation into HSO3-Chol, whereas glucose had little effect at all concentrations examined (Fig. 3and Table1). In the present study, we compared for the first time the effects of glycolytic (glucose) and gluconeogenic (glutamine) renal nutritional substrates, at nearly physiological concentrations, on the metabolic turnover of sulfolipids in the isolated rat renal proximal tubules. The results clearly indicated that the effect of glucose and glutamine is fundamentally different. Scheme 1summarizes our working hypothesis, explanations for which are described below (1) to 3)). It has been reported that anaerobic glycolytic activity of renal cortical slices from well-fed animals is relatively low,None),None)whereas aerobic metabolism of glucose in the cortices is high (see Rev. None)). According to their results, it is speculated that glucose could hardly be converted to cholesterol by anaerobic glycolysis via acetyl-CoA and mevalonic acid. The remaining glucose, which was not utilized by aerobic metabolism or not converted to the other intermediates, could change into UDP-sugars via glucose 6-p, glucose 1-p and UDP-glucose, etc. As an overall result, it might be consistent with our data that glucose stimulated sulfate incorporation into SM2a and SB1a, but not into HSO3-Chol. In contrast, glutamine accelerated the turnover of relatively short chain sulfoglycolipids (SM4s-Glc, SM4s and SM3) and HSO3-Chol (Figs. 2B and3). Guder and Wirthensohn reported that glucose formed from glutamine via gluconeogenesis in isolated proximal tubules is released into the incubation medium. None)According to their results, it is speculated that thede novosynthesized glucose was diluted to a negligible concentration in the medium and could not be re-utilized for additional production of UDP-sugars. This may provide a possible reason why glutamine inactivated sulfate incorporation into longer sugar chain sulfoglycolipids. On the other hand, enhanced sulfate incorporation into HSO3-Chol may be caused by stimulation ofde novocholesterol synthesis from glutamine via oxaloacetate, pyruvate and mevalonic acid. Glutamine as well as glucose can serve as respiratory fuel and generates dozens of moles of ATP per mole. ATP could be utilized to form PAPS (3'-phosphoadenylyl sulfate) which acts as sulfate donor for tubular sulfotransferases. None),None)Thus, in the presence of glucose or glutamine, sulfation of glycolipids and/or cholesterol could also be activated through enhanced production of PAPS. Although 1) to 3) could provide possible interpretations of the present results, further investigations should be necessary to clarify the precise mechanism and confirm our hypotheses. There is a question why stimulatory effect of glucose was more prominent on sulfate incorporation into SM4s-h than that into SM4s-nh (Fig. 2A and Table1). It was reported that the enzyme which catalyzes the synthesis of GalCer, UDP-galactose:ceramide galactosyltransferase (i. e., CGT), prefers ceramides containing hydroxy fatty acids to those containing nonhydroxy fatty acids as the substrates. None),None)These reports are consistent with the present observations, in which the enhanced synthesis of GalCer-h, in the presence of glucose, resulted in the preferential incorporation of sulfate into SM4s-h. It should be also noted that whether a single enzyme, GalCer sulfotransferase (CST), catalyzes the synthesis of various sulfoglycolipids. Honkeet al. None),None)demonstrated that the experimentally produced CST-deficient mouse generates no sulfated glycolipids in the brain and testis. This conclusively suggests that a single enzyme, CST, is responsible for sulfation of all glycolipids in rat renal tubules. In the present assay system, the incubation time (90 min) was too short to up-regulate the expression of enzyme proteins, i.e. tubular glycosyltransferases and/or sulfotransferases. Therefore, metabolic turnover of renal tubular sulfoamphiphiles in this system should principally be affected by metabolic fate of nutritional substrates.