Protein kinase C (PKC) isozymes emerge as important potential therapeutic targets in chronic cardiovascular diseases [1] and in particular, heart failure (HF) [2]. However, individual PKC isozymes play different roles in the pathogenesis of cardiac diseases [3-14]. For instance, PKCdelta activation augments cardiac reperfusion damage after acute myocardial infarction (MI) and inhibition of PKCdelta with deltaV1-1, a specific peptide inhibitor of PKCdelta, reduces infarct size and cardiac dysfunction in a porcine model [4]; an effect that is supported by data from a recent clinical trial (phase IIa) in humans [15]. However, treating hypertensive rats exhibiting HF with deltaV1-1 did not improve cardiac function whereas V1-2, a specific PKC inhibitor peptide, prevented HF progression in these hypertensive animals [6]. Therefore, different PKC isozymes have unique role in various cardiac diseases and the use of isozyme selective pharmacological agents is more useful than using general PKC inhibitors or activators in assessing the role of PKC in these pathologies. Cardiac remodelling is an essential component in the process of HF progression [16]. It involves both adaptive and maladaptive changes in cardiac myocyte size, fibrosis, vascular remodelling and inflammation, which change over time. Impairment of contractility and relaxation in the post-MI myocardium causes overload and stress to individual cells and leads to myocardial cell damage, adverse remodelling and further loss of function. It has long been suggested that decreasing the excessive remodelling events of the failing myocardium should decrease myocardial dysfunction [17]. In an earlier study, we reported that PKCbetaI and betaII levels are elevated in the failing hearts of rats with sustained hypertension, and that angiotensin receptor blocker treatment improved cardiac function presumably by attenuating PKCbetaI and betaII [5]. Further, in a recent study, we found that both acute and chronic inhibition of PKCbetaII improved cardiac contractility and calcium handling in rats with hypertension-induced cardiac dysfunction as well Langendorff preparation (under Revision). Here we focused on the effects of PKCbetaII inhibition on cardiac fibrosis and inflammation in this post-MI HF model. The left anterior descending (LAD) coronary artery of male Wistar rats was occluded to induce MI, as described elsewhere [18] (see alsoFig. 1A). Four weeks later, rats showing HF signs [fractional shortening (FS) less than 25] were treated with betaIIV5-3 (3 mg/kg/day) or with an equimolar concentration of TAT47-57carrier peptide for 6 weeks. Both the TAT peptide and the PKCbetaII inhibitory peptide were delivered systemically using subcutaneous Alzet osmotic pumps between the upper dorsal part of the rats. The sham-operated rats were treated with TAT to serve as a negative control. Percent fractional shortening was estimated by echocardiography using M-mode measurements before and after treatment. The animal protocols were approved by the Stanford University Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee and by the Ethical Committee of the School of Physical Education and Sport of the University of Sao Paulo, Brazil. The investigation conforms to theGuide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animalspublished by the US National Institutes of Health. (A) Heart failure (HF) induction and treatment protocol. Twelve-week-old rats were subjected to myocardial infarction (MI) by left anterior descending coronary artery ligation. Four weeks after MI induction, the rats were treated with the PKCbetaII-specific inhibitor, betaIIV5-3, or with control (TAT-carrier peptide). Peptide treatment was continuous (for 6 weeks) using subcutaneous Alzet pump delivery at 3/mg/kg/day. (B) Representative blots showing the levels of cardiac PKCbetaI and betaII in the total and particulate fraction (triton soluble) from sham-operated normal rats or post-MI HF rats treated with TAT or betaIIV5-3. Note an increase in PKCbetaII but not PKCbetaI in the particulate fraction of failed hearts and a selective loss of PKCbetaII increase in this fraction from rats treated with betaIIV5-3. Association of PKC with the particulate fraction is a measure of PKC activation [36]. The level of cellular PKC distribution between the total and particulate fractions was normalized using GAPDH and Galphao, respectively. (C) Fractional shortening was measured and plotted as graphs before (at week 16) and after treatment (at week 22),n= 6 per group. (D) Cardiac morphology using haematoxylin and eosin stained cardiac slices. (E) Representative photomicrographs of each group (as labelled) depicting cardiomyocyte hypertrophy (increase in cell size). (F) Quantitative analyses of cardiomyocyte width,n= 6 per group. *P less than 0.05 sham;SP less than 0.05versuspost-MI HF treated with betaIIV5-3. Data were analysed by theanovawith apost hoctesting by Bonferroni. Heart rate (HR) and systolic blood pressure (BP) were determined non-invasively using a computerized tail-cuff system (BP-2000, Visitech System, Apex, NC, USA). Non-invasive cardiac function was assessed by two-dimensional guided M-mode echocardiography, in halothane-anesthetized control and HF rats, before and after experimental period. Transthoracic echocardiography was performed using an Acuson Sequoia model 512 echocardiography machine (Acuson Corporation, Mountain View, CA, USA) equipped with a 14 MHz linear transducer. After measuring cardiac functionin vivo,hearts were isolated, weighed and the left ventricle was excised. The ratio between left ventricle weight and body weight (LVW/BW) was calculated. Mid-ventricles were then fixed with 10% formalin in PBS, embedded in paraffin and several transverse sections were prepared. Paraffin-embedded cardiac sections of the myocardium were dewaxed using series of xylene and ethanol and further rehydrated. Then, these sections were stained with haematoxylin and eosin. Haematoxylin and eosin stained slides were used to measure myocyte width, an index of hypertrophied cardiomyocytes, using light microscopy with 400* magnification. At least 100 cardiomyocytes were counted for each group and three sections per group were analysed. Only those cells that had the nucleus at their centre were used for these measurements. These analyses were carried out in a blinded fashion using a computer-assisted morphometric system (Leica Quantimet 520, Cambridge Instruments, UK) [19]. Paraffin-embedded mid-ventricle sections of the myocardium were dewaxed by series of xylene and ethanol, and then rehydrated. Further, these sections were stained with picrosirius red; collagen deposition, an index of myocardial fibrosis, was observed and quantified by using a computer-assisted morphometric system (Leica Quantimet 500, Cambridge, UK) [20]. At least 20 fields per slide were counted for each group. Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded cardiac tissue sections were used to study myocardial inflammation. After dewaxing and rehydration, these sections were stained with haematoxylin and eosin. Haematoxylin and eosin staining was used to identify and to quantify the infiltration of polymorphonuclear cells; identification of these cells was guided by their localization and morphology of their nuclei. The photomicrographs of haematoxylin and eosin stained sections (400*) were captured using a camera attached to the microscope. Then, at least 15 fields per slide were observed for each group to evaluate the infiltration of inflammatory cells. Toluidine blue was used to stain mast cells, as described previously [21]. Briefly, paraffinized sections of myocardium were dewaxed using xylene and ethanol, then rehydrated and incubated with 0.05% (w/v) toluidine blue for 30 min. followed by counterstaining with 0.01% (w/v) eosin for 1 min. Decreased violet-coloured metachromatic staining in the mast cells and increased staining in their immediate surrounding was used to identify degranulated mast cells. Mast cell density was quantified by counting the number of toluidine blue-positive mast cells per field. At least 20 fields per slide were counted for each group. Protein lysate was prepared by homogenizing left ventricular tissue in 1 ml of lysis buffer containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors. Samples were centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 10 min. at 4 degrees C and supernatants were stored at -80 degrees C until use. Total protein concentration of samples was measured by the Bradford method. Thirty micrograms of protein sample was applied to each well. For Western blot experiments, proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and identified with anti-TGFbeta1 (transforming growth factor), PKCbetaI, PKCbetaII and Galphao rabbit polyclonal antibodies and anti-glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) mouse monoclonal antibody (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA). The bound antibody was visualized with horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-coupled secondary antibody. GAPDH was used as a housekeeping marker for comparison. Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded cardiac tissue sections were used for immunohistochemical staining. After dewaxing and rehydration, these slides were incubated with primary antibody (anti-phospho SMAD2/3 rabbit polyclonal antibody; dilution 1:100, Santa Cruz) at 4 degrees C, the slides were washed in Tris-buffered saline and respective HRP-conjugated secondary antibody at a dilution of 1:500 (Santa Cruz) was added and incubated at room temperature for 45 min. The immunostaining was visualized by diaminobenzidine tetrahydrochloride which yielded a brown colour, and counterstained with haematoxylin. Then, the sections were viewed with a high power light microscope with camera, and phospho SMAD2/3-positive nuclei were counted in blinded fashion. At least 10 high power fields were counted from each slide. Data are presented as mean +/- standard error of mean (S.E.M.). One-wayanovafollowed by Bonferroni'spost hoctest was used to compare the effect of PKCbetaII on PKC translocation, fractional shortening, heart weight/body-weight, cardiomyocyte diameter, collagen deposition, active/latent TGFbetaI and mast cell density and degranulation. Student's t-test (one-tailed distribution/two-sample equal variance) was used to compare the effect of PKCbetaIIversusTAT control on infarcted area. Statistical significance was considered achieved when the value ofPwas less than 0.05. Sustained treatment of rats with the PKCbetaII-specific inhibitor, betaIIV5-3 [22] selectively inhibited PKCbetaII activity as determined by a reduction in translocation of this isozyme to the particulate fraction; this treatment had no effect on PKCbetaI translocation in MI HF rats (Fig. 1B). Also, sustained treatment with betaIIV5-3 did not affect the level or translocation of other PKC isozymes (data not shown). Echocardiographic analysis of a group of rats subjected to MI demonstrated a significant improvement in fractional shortening with betaIIV5-3 treatment as compared with TAT treatment (Fig. 1C,P less than 0.05). Fractional shortening was 21 +/- 2% before betaIIV5-3 treatment began and after 6 weeks of treatment with betaIIV5-3, fractional shortening increased to 35 +/- 2%. In contrast, in post-MI HF rats treated with TAT, fractional shortening did not improve; it was 19 +/- 3% before treatment and 18 +/- 2% after 6 weeks treatment with the control peptide, TAT (Fig. 1C; *P less than 0.05 sham andSP less than 0.05versuspost-MI HF with betaIIV5-3). betaIIV5-3 treatment improved left ventricular end systolic diameter (LVESd) significantly (Table 1) (SP less than 0.05versuspost-MI HF with betaIIV5-3). Although betaIIV5-3 treatment slightly improved LVEDd and posterior wall thickness (PWT), it did not attain statistical significance (Table 1). There were no significant differences among groups in terms of HR, BP and BW. However, Post-MI HF rats treated with TAT displayed increased mortality (46%) compared to HF rats treated with betaIIV5-3 (10%). Body-weight and cardiovascular measurements in sham and heart failure ratsHR: heart rate; BP: blood pressure; BW: body-weight; LVWBW: left ventricular weight/body-weight ratio; PWT: posterior wall thickness; LVEDd: left ventricular end-diastolic diameter; LVESd: left ventricular end-systolic diameter. *P less than 0.05versussham andSP less than 0.05versuspost-MI-HF with TAT. anovawithpost hoctesting by Bonferron was used in those analyses. Morphological analysis of the transverse heart sections showed reduced wall thickness and reduced left and right ventricle diameter in the betaIIV5-3 treated group as compared with the post-MI TAT-treated rats (Fig. 1D). We found that PKCbetaII inhibition decreased the LVW/BW ratio relative to TAT-treated rats (2.8 +/- 0.1versus3.3 +/- 0.2,SP less than 0.05). LVW/BW was 2.7 +/- 0.1 in sham (SP less than 0.05versusTAT-treated rats;Table 1). Cardiomyocyte width in post-MI rats increased as compared with sham-operated rats and this increase was blunted in rats treated with betaIIV5-3 (Fig. 1E). Quantification of cardiomyocyte width showed an increase from 27 +/- 0.3 to 32 +/- 0.2 mum in sham- and post-MI TAT control-treated rats (P less than 0.05); and to 28 +/- 0.6 mum in post-MI betaIIV5-3-treated ratsversuspost-MI TAT-treated rats, respectively (P less than 0.05;n= 3-6 for each group) (Fig. 1F). On week 22, 10 weeks after infarction, collagen deposition, an index of myocardial fibrosis, was more pronounced in the peri-infarcted area, as compared with the remote area (Fig. 2A). No differences in infarcted area were observed between post-MI HF groups (Fig. 2B). When examining the remote area, collagen deposition was significantly elevated in the TAT-treated post-MI rats, as compared with TAT-treated sham-operated rats (Fig. 2C-E and F). Treatment with betaIIV5-3 resulted in a significant decrease in collagen deposition in the remote area. (A) Collagen deposition was found in both remote and peri-infarcted areas of post-myocardial infarction (MI) hearts as measured by picrosirius staining on week 22, 10 weeks after the myocardial infarction and 6 weeks after peptide treatment. (B) Quantification of cardiac infarcted area in post-MI heart failure (HF) rats treated with TAT or betaIIV5-3. Note that no differences were observed between groups. (C-E) Representative photomicrographs (400*) from sham operated age-matched rats, post-MI HF rats treated with TAT or with betaIIV5-3 showing collagen deposition in the cardiac remote area (red staining). (F) Quantitative analyses of collagen deposition in the cardiac remote area,n= 6 per group; *P less than 0.05 sham;SP less than 0.05versuspost-MI HF with betaIIV5-3. Student's t-test (one-tailed distribution/two-sample equal variance) was used to compare the effect of PKCbetaII on infarcted area. Cardiac collagen deposition was analysed by theanovawith apost hoctesting by Bonferroni. Increased myocardial fibrosis is due, at least in part, to an increase in TGFbeta1 levels and a subsequent activation of SMAD-signalling cascades [23]. We found that myocardial levels of active TGFbeta1 and phospho SMAD2/3 increased in post-MI TAT-treated hearts as compared with sham-operated rats (Fig. 3A-D). A 6-week treatment of rats with HF with betaIIV5-3 significantly attenuated the increase in both TGFbeta1 and phospho SMAD2/3 level in the remote area of the left ventricle (Fig. 3A-D). Upon quantification, we found that the percentage of phospho SMAD2/3-positive nuclei in post-MI TAT-treated hearts increased as compared with sham-operated rats (222 +/- 8versus100 +/- 2), whereas treatment with betaIIV5-3 resulted in a significant decrease in phospho SMAD2/3-positive nuclei (89 +/- 2) (not shown in figure). (A-C) Phospho SMAD2/3 immunostaining of hearts from sham-operated rats, or from post-myocardial infarction (MI) heart failure (HF) rats treated with TAT or betaIIV5-3. A difference in immunostaining (brown) is noted in the peri-vascular region (indicated by box). n= 3 per group. At least 10 high power fields were counted from each slide. (D) Cardiac active and latent TGFbeta1 levels were determined by immunoblot. Data are presented as percentage of control (sham) group,n= 6 per group. *P less than 0.05 sham;SP less than 0.05versuspost-MI HF with betaIIV5-3. Data were analysed by theanovawith apost hoctesting by Bonferroni. Infiltrating inflammatory cells in the myocardium contribute to cardiac remodelling through secretion of cytokines [24,25]. Histochemical analyses demonstrated peri-vascular inflammation throughout the myocardium, predominantly in the peri-infarct region. Our analysis suggested that apart from the peri-vascular region, myocardial inflammation was increased in the epicardium in rats with HF (Fig. 4B and B1) as compared with sham controls (Fig. 4A and A1). However, after 6 weeks of betaIIV5-3 treatment, inflammatory cell infiltration was significantly inhibited in rats with post-MI-induced end-stage HF (Fig. 4C and C1). (A-C) Infiltration of inflammatory cells in the epicardial region is shown by haematoxylin and eosin stained myocardial sections of post-myocardial infarction heart failure rats treated with TAT and betaIIV5-3,as well as sham-operated normal rats. 100*. Respective representative photomicrographs are presented,n= 3-5 per group. (A1-C1) Higher magnification of these photomicrographs is shown in the lower panels. 400*. Infiltrated inflammatory cells in the epicardial region are indicated by asterisks. The haematoxylin and eosin was used to identify and to quantify the infiltration of polymorphonuclear cells, based upon the localization of the cell and morphology of the nucleus of the cell. Mast cells reside close to blood vessels in the myocardium and are important contributors to cardiac pathology as they release pro-fibrogenic, pro-inflammatory and pro-hypertrophic factors upon stimulation [26]. A two-fold increase in mast cell density (Fig. 5B and D) and a two-fold increase in mast cell degranulation (Fig. 5F and H) were observed in the failed myocardium of rats 10 weeks after the induction of MI, as compared with sham-operated rats (Fig. 5A and D and E and H). betaIIV5-3 treatment from week 4 to week 10 after MI decreased mast cell density by 30% relative to TAT-treated rats (P less than 0.05;Fig. 5C and D) and decreased mast cell degranulation by 20% (P less than 0.05;Fig. 5G and H) in post-MI animals. Mast cell degranulation was more apparent in the epicardial region (Fig. 5F) whereas fewer degranulated mast cells were found in the endocardial regions in any of the three groups (Fig. 5A-C). (A-C) Toluidine blue-positive mast cells are shown (as indicated by black arrowheads) in the endocardium (upper panels) of sham and post-myocardial infarction (MI) rats with heart failure treated with TAT or betaIIV5-3. (D) Quantification of total mast cell (MC) numbers including both degranulating and non-degranulating mast cells,n= 3 per group. (E-G) Mast cell degranulation is greater in the epicardial region (lower panels) of post-MI heart failure (HF) rats with TAT treatment as compared with sham-operated rats and post-MI HF rats treated with betaIIV5-3. Non-degranulated mast cells, partially degranulated mast cells and completely degranulated mast cells are indicated by black arrowheads, black and white arrows, respectively. The completely degranulated emptied mast cells have only outer cell membrane staining (white arrows). (H) Quantification of degranulated mast cells is presented as percent of total mast cell number,n= 3 per group. *P less than 0.05 and **P less than 0.01versussham;#P less than 0.05versuspost-MI HF with TAT. Data were analysed by theanovawith apost hoctesting by Bonferroni. In this study, we analysed myocyte hypertrophy, myocardial fibrosis, cardiac inflammation and mast cell degranulation in a region remote from the infarcted area. We hypothesized that remodelling of the remote area as induced by MI contributed to cardiac dysfunction. Indeed, with the use of the PKCbetaII-selective inhibitor, betaIIV5-3, remodelling in the remote area was blunted and cardiac function was improved in a rat model of post-MI HF. In this model, rats were subjected to MI and developed symptoms of end-stage HF. A 6-week treatment with betaIIV5-3, initiated 4 weeks after MI induction, attenuated cardiac dysfunction, myocyte hypertrophy, collagen deposition, myocardial inflammation and mast cell density and degranulation. In addition, PKCbetaII inhibition normalized both right and left ventricles wall thickness (Fig. 1DandTable 1). In hearts of patients with HF, both PKCbetaI and II levels are higher relative to age-matched normal hearts [8]. A more recent study also reported increased expression of PKCbetaII in end-stage human HF (dilated cardiomyopathy) [10]. Similarly, we also found a 50% increase in PKCbetaII activity in the myocardium of rats with end-stage HF (10 weeks after MI) as compared with sham-operated rats; treatment with betaIIV5-3 for 6 weeks selectively decreased PKCbetaII levels close to the levels in the sham rats (Fig. 1B). As expected, after 6-week treatment, the PKCbetaII-specific inhibitor betaIIV5-3 did not affect the levels or activity of PKCbetaI, whereas it completely blunted the activation of PKCbetaII (Fig. 1B). The role of PKCbetaI in HF in mice is presently controversial. Because PKCbetaI and betaII are alternatively spliced forms of the same gene product, some of the studies did not distinguish between the two isozymes. Although it was found that adult mice express little PKCbeta in the myocardium [9], several reports using a variety of tools demonstrate that PKCbeta is an important isozyme in cardiac disease. In fact, targeted overexpression of PKCbetaII in mice resulted in cardiac hypertrophy with myocardial dysfunction, fibrosis, inflammation and foetal gene expression [11]. Moreover, activated overexpression of PKCbetaII was lethal in neonatal mice, whereas in adult mice it induced hypertrophy and affected cardiac contractility [27]. These studies show the importance of PKCbetaII in cardiac hypertrophy in mice. In contrast, in one study, PKCbeta KO mice showed no cardiac symptoms [28]. This may reflect compensatory effects by other PKC isozymes or other signalling enzymes. Further, a number of studies suggest that mice are not ideally suitable as models of human diseases. Similar to HF in humas, in a hypertension-induced HF model in rats, PKCbetaII levels increased in the late HF stage and not during the early hypertrophy stage [5]. Here we show an increase in fractional shortening following a 6-week betaIIV5-3 treatment in rats that developed end-stage pathological hypertrophy 4 weeks after MI. We also found that a reduction in cardiomyocyte width and heart/BW ratio. These data indicate that PKCbetaII activation contributes to the development of cardiac hypertrophy and dysfunction in rats. Because PKCbetaII levels and activity are elevated in failed human hearts, we suggest that PKCbetaII inhibition is a potential target for the treatment of HF. Supporting this suggestion is the study of Boyleet al. , who reported that a 4-week treatment with ruboxistaurin (LY333531), an inhibitor of PKCbeta, beginning a week after induction of MI, inhibited cardiac fibrosis in rats [29]. A similar reduction in myocardial fibrosis (collagen deposition) following treatment with a specific PKCbetaII inhibitor has been observed by us in the MI-induced end-stage HF in rats. Moreover, betaIIV5-3 treatment resulted in decreased TGFbeta1 levels and SMAD2/3 phosphorylation in the hearts of post-MI HF rats. TGFbeta1 ligation to its receptor leads to SMAD2/3 phosphorylation in the cytoplasm and translocation of phospho SMAD2/3 into the nucleus to stimulate proliferation through increased transcription and protein synthesis of select genes [23]. We found that fibroblast stimulation and collagen release was inhibited by chronic treatment with betaIIV5-3 (Fig. 2), presumably by limiting the TGF-SMAD signalling pathway. A 6-week betaIIV5-3 treatment also caused a reduction in infiltration of inflammatory cells into post-MI myocardium. Previous studies reported that PKCbetaII activation is involved in a variety of inflammatory processes. PKCbetaII activation by interferon-gamma leads to translocation of PKCbetaII into the nucleus and activation of the transcription factors that regulate the expression of critical inflammatory genes such as major histocompatability complex II in microglial cells [30]. High glucose-induced interleukin (IL)-6 release from monocytes was attenuated by PKCbetaII inhibition [31]. We also found a reduction in mast cell number and degranulation after treating rats with betaIIV5-3. A role for PKCbetaII in different stages of the MC degranulation process has been previously suggested byin vitrostudies. Aggregation of the FCRI on mast cells elicits a PKCbeta-dependentfosbinding of DNA and resulting gene transcription in mast cell culture [32]. PKC-betaII regulates Akt activity by directly phosphorylating it on Ser-473 in antigen-IgE-stimulated mast cells [33] and PKCbetaII-deficient mast cells exhibit reduced IL-6 production [34]. Stimulation by antigen or PMA and a calcium ionophore induces Ser (1917) phosphorylation of myosin heavy chain II in mast cells, which coincides with the exocytosis process in these cells, an effect that is mediated by PKCbetaII [35]. These reports are consistent with our findings here on the role of PKCbetaII in mast cell activationin vivo. However, the molecular mechanism leading to the beneficial effects of PKCbetaII inhibition remains to be elucidated. In conclusion, we show that sustained selective inhibition of PKCbetaII by betaIIV5-3 attenuated adverse cardiac remodelling and improved myocardial function in an end-stage HF model induced by MI in rats. If proven to be safe, such a specific inhibitor of PKCbetaII may benefit human patients with MI-induced HF.