The prevalence of renal artery stenosis (RAS) is fast-growing world-wide, especially in the elderly population. In addition to hypertension and progressive renal function decline, the incidence of cardiovascular morbidity and mortality is also on the rise. NoneThese pathophysiological changes are accompanied by increased levels of Angiotensin II (AngII) which is formed by activated renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS) in RAS. The application of angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEI) or Ang II receptor blocker (ARB), which block the effects of AngII by binding to its type I receptor (AT1), have conferred invaluable benefits not only in relieving renovascular hypertension, but also lowering the cardiovascular complications. None,NoneIn the kidney, although the inhibition of RAAS has been useful in alleviating proteinuria and slowing renal function decline, it might acutely reduce the stenotic kidney capillary hydrostatic pressure and consequently glomerular filtration rate (GFR). None,NoneHowever, abundant evidence has shown that in most patients these drugs are well tolerated. NoneConceivably, chronic blockade of RAAS might also blunt deleterious processes in the kidney, such as microvascular remodeling that characterizes ischemic kidney damage,None,Noneand may modulate oxidative stress and inflammation as observed in other forms of CKD. None,NoneHowever, the potential effects of long-term ARB on the microvasculature within the stenotic kidney remain unclear. This study tested the hypothesis that chronic treatment with the ARB Valsartan would preserve stenotic kidney function in a unilateral RAS swine model, similar to a conventional antihypertensive regimen, by decreasing tissue injury that may offset the hemodynamic reduction of GFR. At 10 wks, there were no differences in body weight and degree of stenosis among the groups (Table 1), including Normal, unilateral RAS, RAS+Valsartan or RAS+triple therapy (TT, reserpine+hydralazine+hydrochlorothiazide). Blood pressure changes of the study groups during the observation are shown inFigure 1-1. Mean arterial pressure (MAP) increased at 1 wk after RAS induction and remained similarly elevated at 6 wks (P=0.29 among 3 groups), suggesting hemodynamically significant RAS. MAP continued increasing in untreated RAS at 10wks (P less than 0.05 vs. 6wks), but was lowered by both Valsartan and TT groups to the same level, although neither reduced MAP to normal (P=0.02 and 0.04 vs. Normal, respectively). Urine protein was increased in all 3 RAS groups, but was alleviated only by Valsartan (P=0.040 vs. RAS, P=0.053 vs. Normal,Table 1). Valsartan also decreased urinary levels of the kidney injury marker neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin (NGAL) that was elevated in RAS. Creatinine level was increased in all RAS groups, and unaffected by either treatment. Serum potassium in RAS+Valsartan group did not differ from Normal and RAS, while TT induced a slight decrease. Serum sodium was comparable among the groups. Stenotic-kidney GFR was decreased in all RAS groups, as were renal blood flow (RBF) and cortical renal perfusion (Figure 1-2, A-C). Neither Valsartan nor TT increased RBF or GFR, yet cortical perfusion was slightly but significantly increased in RAS+Valsartan compared to RAS. Basal medullary R2*, an index of the concentration of deoxyhemoglobin in the kidney,None,Nonein both the RAS+Valsartan and RAS+TT groups was higher than Normal (Figure 1-3B), suggesting lower medullary oxygenation. The tubular response to furosemide, which decreases R2* through increasing medulla oxygenation via inhibition of solute transport and thereby of oxygen consumption,Nonewas abolished in RAS, but was improved by TT and to a slightly greater extent, by Valsartan (Figure 1-3C), indicating recovery of viability of medullar tubules. Cortical R2* value was slightly lower in RAS+Valsartan than in RAS, consistent with lower levels of cortical deoxyhemoglobin (Figure 1-3A). RAS decreased the density of both small and medium-size microvessel through the inner and outer cortex (Figure 2-1 A-D, E-F). Valsartan normalized outer cortical small vessels density and improved that of medium-size vessels (P=0.01 vs. RAS). In contrast, TT improved only small vessels density. Microvascular density in the inner cortex remained unchanged by either drug. Consistent with the microvascular density changes, Valsartan increased expression of basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), and normalized the expression of its receptor-2 (FLK-1) that was suppressed in RAS (Figure 2-2, A). TT only increased the receptor FLK-1 expression (P=0.01 vs. Normal). Expression of endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) remained unchanged among the groups. Valsartan also enhanced the expression of the neovessel maturation/stability modulatorsNoneangiopoietin-1 and its receptor Tie-2, which was down regulated in RAS. TT also improved expression of Tie-2, but to a lesser extent than Valsartan. Therefore, Valsartan promoted both angiogenic factors and their receptors, but TT mainly activated their receptors. Notably, TT but not Valsartan increased thrombospondin (TSP)-1 (P=0.01 vs. Normal), which inhibits neovascularization. Hence, both Valsartan and TT improved microvascular density, but Valsartan tended to exert greater angiogenic impact. Hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-1 alpha, closely linked to neovascularization in tissue ischemia, was down-regulated in RAS, as previously reported in our RAS model,Nonebut normalized by both medication regimens (Figure 2-2, B)Dihydroethidium (DHE) staining indicated increased oxidative stress in RAS that was attenuated by Valsartan (P=0.01 vs. RAS) but not TT (P=0.07 vs. Normal). This was consistent with NAD(P)H oxidase P47 expression, which was increased in RAS, but decreased only by Valsartan (Figure 3-1). Tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha expression in RAS kidneys was enhanced in renal tubules and interstitium, but was attenuated to similar extent by Valsartan and TT (Figure 3-2). Trichrome staining showed that fibrosis was blunted to the same extent by both Valsartan and TT compared to RAS (Figure 3-3). In line with trichrome staining, both Valsartan and TT normalized elevated matrix metalloproteinases (MMP)-2 expression in RAS and down-regulated tissue-inhibitor of metalloproteinases (TIMP)-1. TT also induced a greater decrease in transforming growth-factor (TGF)-beta than Valsartan (P=0.03). Neither medication decreased connective tissue growth factor (CTGF) (Figure 3-4). AT1R was upregulated in RAS, and Valsartan further enhanced its expression, possibly as a feedback to its blockade. AT2R was similarly elevated in all RAS groups (Figure 4). Our study shows that for the same level of blood pressure control, a 4-week chronic treatment with the ARB Valsartan achieved similar renal function and did not decrease the stenotic kidney GFR compared to a conventional antihypertensive regimen. In addition, Valsartan elicited a slightly better preservation of intra-renal perfusion, microvascular density, and medullary tubular function, although overall kidney function was similar to that achieved with TT. Nonetheless, our data suggest that the safety and efficacy of Valsartan in the management of renovascular hypertension in RAS might be mediated by a novel protective effect on the intrarenal microvasculature. An important mechanism contributing to intrarenal damage distal to RAS, microvascular remodeling and regression characterize the pathophysiologic alteration caused by prolonged vasoconstriction, oxidative stress and fibrosis. None,None,NoneA physiological acute decrease in oxygen supply up-regulates the expression of HIF-1-alpha, a primary defense mechanism in the adaptive response to ischemia, and in turn of VEGF that induces new vessel formation. However, this compensatory capability can be impaired in chronic ischemia by amplified oxidative stress and inflammation in RAS (reflected in our study by increased DHE staining, P47 expression, and TNF-alpha), which destabilize HIF-1-alpha and degrade VEGF protein, thus interfering with tissue repair by compensatory angiogenesis. None,None,NoneAccordingly, the present study demonstrated that HIF-1 alpha was suppressed in RAS, along with down-regulated FLK-1 and VEGF that failed to increase. The unchanged level of VEGF could be a result of its dynamic temporal expression pattern in ischemia. None,NoneInterestingly, our data show that Valsartan activates multiple angiogenic factors in the stenotic kidneys, including bFGF, VEGF/FLK-1 and HIF-1-alpha, possibly by alleviating oxidative stress and inflammation (TNF-alpha), as observed in other chronic kidney diseases. None,None,NoneFurthermore, Valsartan upregulated the key modulators of vessel stability and maturation Angiopoietin-1 and Tie-2. Collectively, these effects may account for the slightly greater improvement of intra-renal microvascular density than that achieved by conventional TT, although both drug regimens improved cortical microvascular density. Such benefits are likely functionally consequential, because we have previously shown that loss of small outer cortical microvessels correlates with persistent kidney dysfunction after renal artery revascularization. NoneHowever, while TT increased the expression of the receptors FLK-1 and Tie-2 and restored HIF-1 alpha, these might have been offset by the parallel upregulation of TSP-1. Therefore, some of the beneficial effects of Valsartan on the kidney might be mediated by a microvascular protective effect, which appears to be blood pressure-independently. The drugs used for TT decrease blood pressure by direct vasodilation, diuresis, or central monoamine-depleting, and are considered to have few effects on inflammation, oxygenation, and the microvasculature. Importantly, we observed in this study minor but significant renal protective effects, which might be attributed to vasodilation of intra-renal vessels, because blood pressure reduction per se might further decrease renal perfusion distal to the stenosis. Indeed, hydralazine has also been linked to anti-oxidative and anti-inflammatory effects. None,NoneIn addition, hydrochlorothiazide might sustain GFR by increasing efferent arteriolar resistance. NoneA protective effect of TT has been observed in other models, yet is often ascribed to antihypertensive properties. NoneWe have previously shown that basal R2* in post-stenotic human kidneys increases in severeNonebut not moderate ischemia,Nonewhile medullary response to furosemide is blunted in the latter, as observed in RAS pig kidneys in the current study. Presumably, decreased tubular injury and resumed transport activity, reflected by an increase of delta-R2* in response to furosemide, might have contributed to the increase in basal R2* in RAS+Valsartan and RAS+TT kidneys. NoneHence, our data reinforce the notion of a parallel decrease in oxygen-dependent tubular transport and subsequently oxygen consumption as a possible primary mechanism to minimize hypoxia and preserve tubular cells. NoneIndeed, in parallel to the increase in basal R2* value in our study, HIF-1 alpha that was inhibited in RAS also increased by Valsartan and TT. The long-term effects of increased tubular work in the face of unchanged RBF warrant further studies, although evidently both approaches ultimately decrease renal fibrosis in our model. ARB exert their beneficial effects via blocking the binding of AngII to the AT1 receptor, thereby allowing it to bind to the AT2 receptor. NoneBoth the AT1 and AT2 receptors were up-regulated in RAS, as previously shown,Noneand we also found that AT1R expression was further increased by Valsartan, probably a feedback secondary to receptor blockade. Notably, this may also affect the microvascular remodeling observed in our study. Although microvascular rarefaction induced by oxidative stress, inflammation and fibrosis dominates kidney remodeling in RAS, direct pro-angiogenic effects of AngII include up-regulating angiogenic factors such as VEGF, bFGF, eNOS and Ang-1/Tie-2, and mediated by binding to either the AT1 or AT2 receptors. NoneHowever, the expression pattern of AT1 and AT2 receptors differs greatly by tissue, and may impact the involvement of AngII in neovascularization. NoneWhile AT1R is abundant in a number of adult tissues,Nonethe AT2R, in general, is restricted in adults to organs such as kidney, brain and adrenal gland. Hence, the influence of ARB on angiogenesis may possibly be affected by the type of tissue. NoneIndeed, in our study the improvement of microvascular density after AT1-R blockade by Valsartan could be attributed to binding of AngII to the upregulated AT2-R, possibly stimulated by kidney injury. None,NoneThis stipulation is supported by the observation that chronic treatment with Lorsartan for 2 weeks increased microvessel density in the brain, where AT2 receptor is also richly expressed. NoneOur study is limited by the use of relatively young animals and short duration of the disease, yet renal structure and function in our swine model are similar to human kidneys. The long-term effect of ARB on stenotic kidney function, and the contribution of microvascular protection to the improvement of renal function, warrant further studies. The blockade of the RAAS in our study was incomplete, as suggested by the partial blood pressure-response, indicating the need for dose adjustments in pigs. Nevertheless, the comparable decrease in blood pressure relative to TT implies that any observed effects of Valsartan compared to TT were blood pressure-independent. As TT can increase renin release and AngII, its influence on AngII and its link to microvascular change or other mechanisms of ischemic kidney injury should also be further explored. In summary, our study demonstrated that a 4-wk regimen of ARB after 10 weeks of swine unilateral RAS did not impair hemodynamics or function in the stenotic kidney, compared to untreated RAS or to conventional antihypertensive treatment eliciting a comparable blood pressure decrease. We also observed improved renal microvascular density and decreased tubulointerstitial fibrosis in the stenotic kidney of pigs treated with TT. In addition, Valsartan seems to offer slightly greater gains in cortical microvascular density and function (perfusion), and in medullary tubular function, possibly by upregulating expression of several growth factors and suppressing oxidative stress and inflammation. While the measureable differences between Valsartan and TT were not striking, they were associated with a greater decrease in urinary protein and NGAL levels, and may partly offset a hemodynamic ARB-induced reduction in GFR in the ischemic kidney. Therefore, our data imply that chronic use of ARB may not only be safe in unilateral RAS, but may provide reno-protective benefit. This study was approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. Twenty-eight domestic female pigs (50-60 Kg) were studied during 10 weeks of observation. Pigs were randomized to groups (n=7 each) of untreated shams (Normal), unilateral RAS (n=7), and RAS groups chronically treated with Valsartan (RAS+Valsartan, n=7) or triple therapy (RAS+TT) of Hydralazine, Reserpine and Hydrochlorothiazide (RAS+TT, n=7). Pigs were fed isocaloric diets of standard chow containing 0.15-0.65% sodium chloride (NaCL), and had free access to water. RAS was inducedat baselineby placing a local irritant coil in the right main renal artery, leading to gradual development of unilateral RAS, as previously described. NoneA telemetry transducer was then implanted in the left femoral arteryNone,Noneto continuously monitor blood pressure for the following 10 wks. Six wks later, the degrees of stenosis were determined by renal angiography. After determination of the degree of stenosis at 6 weeks of RAS, antihypertensive drugs were fed with food in the corresponding groups for 4 additional weeks. Valsartan (Molecular Weight 435.5, generously provided by Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation, NJ), was delivered at 320mg daily, as previously safely used in swine. None,NoneThe dose of TT components was adjusted weekly based on the blood pressure change, in order to achieve comparable blood pressure with Valsartan group. TT was started with Reserpine 0.1mg/day, hydralazine 25mg/day, and hydrochlorothiazide 12.5mg/day, and reached an average dose at 10 wks of Reserpine 0.2mg/day, Hydralazine 46mg/day, and Hydrochlorothiazide 21mg/day. At 10 wks, 4 wks after initiation of drug treatment, MDCT scanning was performed to assess in each stenotic (or normal) kidney renal blood flow (RBF) and GFR, as described previously. None,NoneBriefly, 160 consecutive scans were performed following a central venous injection of iopamidol (0.5 ml.kg-1.2s-1). Then, MDCT images were reconstructed and displayed with the Analyze(r) software package (Biomedical Imaging Resource, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN). For data analysis, regions of interest (ROI) were selected from tomographic images from the aorta, renal cortex, and medulla to generate time-attenuation curves in each region and obtain measures of renal function. NoneTwo days before MDCT, 3T BOLD MRI (Signa Echo Speed; GE Medical Systems, Milwaukee, WI) scanning was performed to assess intra-renal oxygenation, evaluated as R2*None,None. To further examine the changes in medullary oxygen consumption as a result of solute transport, BOLD measurements were repeated 15 min after a furosemide (20 mg) injection into an ear vein cannula. Furosemide increases medullary oxygenation through inhibition of solute transport and thereby of oxygen consumption. For data analysis, ROIs were manually traced in the cortex and medullaNone,None. For each echo time, the software automatically computed the average of MR signals within each ROI. The BOLD signal (R2*) was measured, and its change after furosemide defined as "delta-R2*". Animals were euthanized three days later after MDCT scanning, using a lethal intravenous dose of sodium pentobarbital (Sleepaway(r), 100mg/kg, Fort Dodge Laboratories, Fort Dodge, IA). The stenotic kidneys were removed using a retroperitoneal incision and immediately dissected and preserved in ice-cold normal saline for micro-CT, frozen in liquid nitrogen (and maintained at -80 degrees C), or preserved in formalin for tissue studies. Blood samples were taken from the inferior vena cava at the time of MDCT studies, centrifuged at 5000 rpm for 10 min, and kept at -80 degrees C until determination of creatinine (spectrophotometry), sodium, and potassium. Urinary protein and Neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin (NGAL), a marker of kidney injuryNonewere measured to probe kidney damage. After the kidney was flushed, microfil MV122 (an intravascular contrast agent) was perfused into the stenotic kidney under physiological pressure through a cannula ligated in the renal artery. Samples were prepared and scanned at 0.5 degrees angular increments at 18-mum resolution, and images analyzed as previously described. None,NoneThe spatial density of microvessels (defined as diameters less than 500 Sm) in the inner and outer renal cortex were calculated and classified according to diameter as small ( less than 40 mum), medium (40-200 mum) or large (200-500 mum) microvessels. NoneIn-situ renal production of superoxide anion was evaluated by DHE staining. Immunoreactivity of TNF-alpha (1:200, NOVUS) was assessed for intra-renal inflammation and renal fibrosis by trichrome staining. Imaging analysis was performed using a computer-aided image-analysis program (AxioVision(r) v4.7.2.0, Carl Zeiss MicroImaging, Thornwood, NY). Standard blotting protocols were followed, using specific ployclonal antibodies against VEGF (1:200 Santa-Cruz), FLK-1 (1:200 Santa-Cruz), bFGF (1:1000 abcam), eNOS (1:1000 abcam), angiopoietin-1 (1:200 Santa-Cruz) and its receptor Tie-2 (1:1000 abcam), the TSP-1 (1:500 abcam), and HIF-1 alpha (1:1000 abcam) for angiogenesis mechanisms, NAD(P)H oxidase P47 (1:200 Santa-Cruz) for oxidative stress, MMP-2, TIMP-1, TGF-beta (all 1:200 Santa-Cruz) and CTGF (1:500 abcam) for evaluation of fibrosis, and AT1 (1:200 Santa-Cruz) and AT2 (1:800 abcam) receptors. Horseradish peroxidase secondary antibodies (GE Healthcare UK Limited) were used and chemiluminescence determined using the SuperSignal West Pico Chemiluminescent Substrate or SuperSignal West Femto Maximum Sensitivity Substrate (Thermo Scientific, IL) according to vendor's instructions. Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH, 1:5000 Covance, Emeryville, CA) served as loading control. Intensities of the protein bands (one per animal) were quantified using densitometry by Alpha-Imager 3400 software (Alpha Innotech Corp., San Leandro, CA). Continuous data are expressed as mean +/- SEM. Comparisons within groups were performed using the paired Student'st-test and among groups ANOVA and unpairedt-test. P less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant.