Between 6 and 9% of North American adults have diabetes (1-3) and are at risk for diabetes-related complications, including both macro- and microvascular disease. Compared with adults without diabetes, adults with diabetes are three times as likely to be hospitalized with cardiovascular disease and six times as likely to be hospitalized with chronic kidney disease (1). The economic burden of diabetes was estimated to be $12.2 billion (Canadian dollars [CDN]) in 2010 (4). In one province in Canada, where only 3.6% of the population had diabetes, medical costs for this group accounted for 15% of total health care spending (5). Patients with diabetes who have complications incur higher costs (4-8) and an estimated one-third of the direct medical cost of diabetes can be attributed to the management of complications (5). Cardiovascular illnesses account for the majority of this spending. Suboptimal glycemic control (measured using HbA1c), proteinuria (measured using urinalysis), and reduced kidney function (measured using the estimated glomerular filtration rate [eGFR]) are independent predictors of adverse clinical outcomes, including cardiovascular morbidity and mortality, in people with diabetes (9-11). Although the cost of diabetes is known to be higher for patients with comorbid illness, the link between cost and the laboratory measures noted above has not been firmly established or quantified. HbA1cwas associated with costs in the U.S. health maintenance organization (HMO) setting (12-15); however, these findings may not be transferable to other settings. Given the emphasis that diabetes clinical practice guidelines place on the use of laboratory measures to monitor and optimize care (16,17), it is important to understand whether these measures are associated with increased health care resource use in people with diabetes. We have determined current medical costs over a 5-year time period for a province-wide cohort of patients with diabetes. We have also determined the association between laboratory-derived measures of glycemic control (HbA1c) and presence of renal complications (proteinuria and reduced eGFR) with the 5-year costs of caring for people with diabetes. We used population-level data from the Alberta Kidney Disease Network (AKDN;www.akdn.info). The AKDN is a province-wide network that captures laboratory measurements, including serum creatinine, lipid profile, HbA1c, and measures of urine protein (18). These data are linked to Alberta Health administrative data, which captures resource utilization for all provincial residents with public health insurance. All residents of Alberta are eligible for public health insurance, and greater than 99% of residents participate in the government-sponsored insurance plan. Public health insurance covers the cost of all medically necessary physician visits, hospitalizations, investigations, and procedures. In addition, drug insurance is provided for all residents greater than 65 years of age. Alberta Health data capture all health care utilization paid for through the provincial insurance plan. Vital statistics and health insurance registry data were also obtained from Alberta Health. Since public health insurance does not provide universal drug coverage for residents less than 65 years of age, drug costs are only available for patients greater than 65 years of age. Physician visit, hospitalization, and ambulatory care costs are available for the entire cohort. A cohort of patients 18 years of age and older with prevalent diabetes as of 1 May 2004 was identified from Alberta Health administrative data (18). Cases of diabetes were defined based on health care encounters incurred between 1 April 1995 and the date of cohort entry, 1 May 2004. We used the validated National Diabetes Surveillance System definition: two or more physician claims for diabetes (ICD-9 code 250.x) within 2 years, or one or more hospitalizations with an ICD-9 code of 250.x, selected from all available diagnostic codes on the Hospital Discharge Abstract prior to 31 March 2002 or equivalent ICD-10 codes (E10-14) after 31 March 2002 (19,20). Due to the use of a single diagnostic code for diabetes, it is often not possible to reliably distinguish between type 1 and type 2 diabetes using administrative data. Approximately 90% of prevalent diabetes cases are type 2 diabetes (1); therefore, all cost estimates based on this cohort are heavily weighted toward type 2 diabetes. The cohort was followed for 5 years, from 1 May 2004 to 30 April 2009. Age, sex, Aboriginal status, and measures of socioeconomic status were determined from the registry file. These factors were included because they are known modifiers of health care utilization (21,22). Aboriginal race/ethnicity was defined by First Nations status. Socioeconomic status was categorized as high income (annual adjusted taxable family income =CDN $39,250), low income (annual adjusted taxable family income CDN $39,250), and income support (provided to people and families with disabilities or with incomes below specified thresholds, e.g., CDN $14,880 for a two-parent family with three children) according to the Alberta health insurance registry (23). The duration of diabetes was calculated as time from diagnosis to 1 May 2004. Comorbidities were defined using administrative data for health care encounters during the 3 years prior to cohort entry. We calculated the Charlson comorbidity index (24,25), a weighted score of 17 comorbid conditions that has been shown to predict mortality (24,25). We also determined the proportion of patients having a history of cardiovascular disease, hypertension, coronary revascularization, cancer, or end-stage renal disease (ESRD). Outpatient measures for HbA1c, eGFR, and proteinuria (urine microalbumin-to-creatinine ratio [ACR] and urine dipstick) were included from 2 years prior to 6 months past the index date. For those patients not on dialysis at baseline, the eGFR was estimated from serum creatinine using the validated CKD-EPI equation (26). The mean of the two outpatient eGFR measurements made closest to the index date (May 1, 2004) was used to categorize patients into standard eGFR categories (eGFR 90, 60-90, 45-60, 30-45, 15-30, and 15 mL/min/m2not requiring dialysis) (27). Patients on dialysis were classified separately, and the eGFR was not considered for this subset. Proteinuria was assessed using the median measurement for urine protein. The ACR was used as the primary measure of proteinuria, supplemented by urine dipstick measurement when ACR was not available. Proteinuria was categorized into three levels: normal (ACR less than 30 mg/g or dipstick negative), mild (ACR 30-300 mg/g or dipstick 1+ or trace), and heavy (ACR greater than 300 mg/g or dipstick greater than =2+). We used the mean of the two HbA1cmeasurements made closest to the index date to classify patients according to glycemic control: good (HbA1cless than 7%), fair (7.1-7.9%), poor (8-9%), or inadequate (>9%). The primary outcome was 5-year cumulative health care costs for the entire cohort. Drug costs were excluded for all patients in this primary outcome. As a secondary outcome, we studied 5-year cumulative costs for the subset of patients greater than 65 years of age, including drug costs. We adopted the perspective of the health care payer; therefore, nonmedical costs (i.e., patient time and travel costs, as well as costs related to lost productivity) were not included. All costs are reported in 2010 CDN dollars. To inform the generalizability of our results, we determined the incidence of clinical outcomes (myocardial infarction, stroke, congestive heart failure, coronary revascularization, ESRD, and death) over the 5-year follow-up period, enabling a qualitative comparison with rates observed in other diabetes cohorts. All analyses were performed for the cohort as a whole and for the subgroup 65 years of age (in whom drug costs were included). The mean 5-year direct medical costs of diabetes were determined in both cases. Since 3% of patients were lost to follow-up due to outmigration, imputation for missing costs was not required. Costs were further categorized according to baseline demographic and clinical characteristics, including comorbid illness and laboratory measurements. The association between measures of baseline glycemic control, kidney function (including a separate category for people with ESRD on dialysis at baseline), proteinuria, and 5-year cost was determined using multivariate linear regression, controlling for age, sex, Aboriginal status, socioeconomic status, duration of diabetes, and Charlson index score. Given its ease of interpretation and to facilitate communication, we used a linear regression model using ordinary least squares estimation to assess factors associated with cost, and to estimate the adjusted mean 5-year cost for each category. We compared the fit of the linear regression model against that of four other candidate models, linear regression on log total costs with smearing retransformation (28) and three generalized linear models using the negative binomial (gamma) and inverse Gaussian distributions, and found that the linear regression model performed well based on mean absolute error, root mean squared error, Lin concordance, pseudoRsquared, probability plots, quantile-quantile plots, and predicted versus observed mean costs. Ethics approval for the study was obtained from the conjoint health ethics review board at the University of Calgary. All analyses were undertaken using STATA, version 11.2 (College Station, TX). Overall 138,662 patients with prevalent diabetes as of 1 May 2004 were included in the cohort. The cohort was 47.8% female, 41.7% of patients were greater than 65 years of age, and the mean duration of diabetes was 5.3 years (Table 1). The most common comorbid condition was hypertension (60.5%), and all comorbidities increased with age. In patients greater than 65 years of age, two-thirds had filled a prescription for one or more oral antidiabetic medication at baseline (62.2%), and approximately one-fifth (17.4%) of patients were on insulin. Over three-quarters (78.4%) filled a prescription for an antihypertensive agent, and approximately one-half had filled a prescription for a statin (52.8%). Compared with patients less than 65 years of age, patients greater than 65 years of age were less likely to be Aboriginal (6.5 vs. 2.2%), less likely to be on income support (16.7 vs. 4.8%), had a longer average duration of diabetes (5.0 vs. 5.9 years), and had a higher burden of disease measured by a Charlson score of greater than 3 (6.6 vs. 21.1%) (Table 1). Baseline characteristics for the cohortLaboratory measurements were available for the majority of the cohort: 73% for HbA1c, 66% for proteinuria, and 84% for eGFR. These measurements revealed that 2.6% of the cohort had an eGFR 30, indicating severe renal impairment, 4.1% had heavy proteinuria, and 9.8% had inadequate glycemic control ( 9% HbA1c) (Table 1). Patients greater than 65 years of age had a higher proportion of people with low eGFR and proteinuria but had better overall glycemic control. In all, 16% of the cohort did not have any of the three measurements. Patients without laboratory measurements tended to be younger (mean age 56.4 vs. 61.6 years) and had a lower burden of disease, measured by a Charlson score of greater than 3 (4.6 vs. 14.2%) (Table 1). Patient characteristics varied across strata of glycemic control and whether or not they had an HbA1cmeasurement (Table 2). Those with inadequate glycemic control were younger, had a higher proportion with Aboriginal status and low socioeconomic status, and had less comorbid disease at baseline. To explore the notion that patients without HbA1cmeasurements may have been misclassified, we compared patients under and over 65 years of age separately (Table 2). Among patients less than 65 years of age, those with unmeasured HbA1cwere less likely to have comorbid illness, possibly suggesting that some of the unmeasured patients were misclassified. Among those greater than 65 years of age with unmeasured HbA1c, some were taking diabetes medications. Those not taking diabetes medications were older and had more comorbid illness, indicating that rather than being misclassified, patients in this category may in fact be at a stage of illness where glycemic control has become less important. Although speculative, taken together, these findings suggest that patients without HbA1cmeasurements represent a heterogeneous group comprised of misclassified patients, those with very mild disease, as well as frail older patients not being actively managed for their diabetes. Baseline characteristics stratified by category of glycemic controlUnadjusted 5-year costs are presented inTable 3. The mean cumulative 5-year cost of caring for patients with diabetes in Alberta, excluding drug costs was CDN $26,978 per patient (IQR $3,401-30,141). Costs increased with age, Aboriginal status, lower socioeconomic status, longer duration of diabetes, and comorbidity. Medications accounted for $10,000 or approximately one-quarter of the 5-year medical costs for people greater than 65 years of age; the mean cumulative 5-year cost for this group, including drug costs, was CDN $44,511 (IQR $13,758-56,333) per patient. Excluding drug costs, patients greater than 65 years of age had consistently higher costs. Mean total 5-year unadjusted costs per patient with diabetes, overall and by subgroupThe cost of managing patients with diabetes, stratified by category of glycemic controlAfter stratification by kidney function, the adjusted cost of caring for patients with diabetes varied from $25,316 (for patients with eGFR 90 mL/min) to $115,348 (for patients not on dialysis with eGFR 15 mL/min) (Fig. 1). Patients who had no proteinuria had an adjusted mean cost of $24,531 per patient compared with $46,836 for patients with heavy proteinuria. Patients with good glycemic control had an adjusted mean cost of $27,064 per patient compared with $32,629 for patients with inadequate control. Similar trends were noted in the subgroup of patients greater than 65 years of age when drug costs were included. Adjusted costs demonstrated a consistent trend of increasing cost with increasing severity of disease, as assessed by laboratory measures (Fig. 1). The mean unadjusted costs for patients without an eGFR or proteinuria measurement were slightly higher compared with the normal categories. In contrast, patients without an HbA1cmeasurement had lower mean costs than those with HbA1c less than =7%. When unadjusted costs were examined by level of glycemic control, we noted a similar pattern across all categories of cost (Table 4); those with good control cost less across all categories of health care spending. Adjusted mean cost per patient, stratified by laboratory measure of relevance to patients with diabetes. The coefficients andPvalues for the linear regression model for the overall cohort are presented inTable 5. In addition to the laboratory parameters described above, worsening socioeconomic status, Aboriginal status, and increasing Charlson index score were associated with increased 5-year costs. When kidney function was considered, people with progressively lower levels of kidney function had significantly higher costs. The model estimates that patients with an eGFR of 15 mL/min have average 5-year costs $91,419 higher compared with a patient with no renal impairment (eGFR 90 mL/min), patients with heavy proteinuria have costs $22,305 higher per patient compared with those with no proteinuria, and patients with inadequate glycemic control had costs $5,565 higher per patient compared with those with good glycemic control. Ordinary least squares regression analysis examining the demographic, clinical, and laboratory factors associated with mean total 5-year costs per patient in people with diabetesThe mean 5-year cost of diabetes in Alberta was CDN $26,978 per patient, excluding drug costs, and CDN $44,511 per patient for patients 65 years of age, including drug costs. Our analysis demonstrates that after adjusting for sex, age, duration of diabetes, Aboriginal status, socioeconomic status, and comorbid illness, costs increased with worsening kidney function, higher levels of proteinuria, and worsening glycemic control. Adjusted costs increased fivefold for people with eGFR 15 mL/min/m2compared with eGFR greater than 90 mL/min/m2($115,348 vs. $25,316) and were twice as high in patients with heavy proteinuria compared with those with no proteinuria ($46,836 vs. $24,531). Costs increased less dramatically as glycemic control worsened; patients with inadequate glycemic control ($32,629 for patients with HbA1c greater than 9%) had 20% higher costs compared with patients with good control ($27,064 for HbA1c less than 7%). Costs were also positively associated with age, Aboriginal status, lower socioeconomic status, duration of diabetes, and Charlson comorbidity index. It is estimated that 2.8 million Canadians will have diabetes in 2012, and our analysis suggests that health care funders will spend approximately CDN $25 billion per year on the care of people with diabetes. This represents ?12.5% of total health care spending in Canada, which was estimated at $200 billion annually in 2011 (29). This may be an underestimation of the costs of diabetes, given that we have not accounted for incident cases of diabetes in our 5-year projections nor have we included the cost of people with undiagnosed diabetes. Other studies have noted an association between poor glycemic control (measured by HbA1c) and cost (12-15); however, all were based on U.S. HMO populations and therefore may not have reflected patients at all socioeconomic levels. By differentiating HbA1clevels into four distinct categories, we were able to show that costs do not appear to rise until HbA1cincreases beyond 7.9%. Similarly, Gilmer et al. (14) found that in HMO patients, higher HbA1cwas predictive of costs in patients with HbA1c greater than 7.5% but not in patients with HbA1cof less than 7.5%. Our analysis further demonstrates that costs are associated with two other laboratory measures of direct relevance to patients with diabetes, namely eGFR, a marker of kidney function and proteinuria. Although this study does not provide direct evidence that improvements in diabetes management would lead to cost reductions, our findings demonstrate a clear association between increased cost and suboptimal glycemic control and markers of kidney disease. It is plausible that better glycemic control in patients with HbA1c greater than 8% might delay or moderate the increasing costs associated with duration of diabetes through a reduction in diabetes complications (30-32). Wagner et al. (33) studied the association between improvement in glycemic control and cost in a retrospective cohort analysis and found that in patients with high baseline HbA1c( greater than =10%) whose glycemic control improved, statistically significant cost savings were achieved. In addition, the optimized use of ACE inhibitors and angiotensin II receptor blockers or improved management of hypertension, through delaying the decline in kidney function (34-41), may lead not only to improvements in health but also to moderation of medical costs. Mean 5-year costs were lower in patients who were not on oral antidiabetic medications or insulin at baseline (in those greater than 65 years of age) and in patients who did not have laboratory testing during the 2 years prior to and 6 months past the index date. We are unable to determine the reasons why patients in these groups did not fill a prescription for diabetes medication or have laboratory testing within the measured time frame, and there are likely many factors involved. Our regression model included a "not measured" category for each laboratory marker, which is reflected in the adjusted cost estimates. Our data demonstrated that the "not measured" category was comprised of a heterogeneous group of patients with respect to demographics and comorbid illness, both of which were accounted for in the adjusted analyses. We did not adjust for medication use since this information was not available for the entire cohort, nor were we able to adjust for unknown factors, such as mild diabetes, misclassification, and more specific socioeconomic characteristics. Our study was an observational cohort study and was therefore limited by potential confounding and by the data available. Although we controlled for all available confounders, including age, sex, socioeconomic status, and comorbid illness, we were not able to control for other potentially important variables, including ethnicity and education. In addition, although we found a strong association between glycemic control, proteinuria, and kidney function and costs, it is unknown whether improved management would in fact lead to a decrease in health care costs. Economic evaluations alongside controlled intervention studies are needed to draw definitive conclusions. In addition, we used an administrative definition of diabetes to define our cohort and, although this definition has been shown to perform well, some cases may have been misclassified. Finally, the cohort was representative of the population of Alberta. Although this may not be generalizable to all other settings, we expect that the relative differences in costs that we observed across different categories of laboratory measures would hold in other jurisdictions. Our study also has many strengths. The large dataset makes it unlikely that any of the associations found between patient factors and cost were due to chance alone. Furthermore, our unique dataset included access to linked laboratory, clinical, and costing data, enabling us to study the association between disease severity markers and cost. In summary, we have generated updated values for the 5-year cost of caring for patients with diabetes in a universal health care system, which will aid decision makers in planning future resource allocation. After controlling for clinical and demographic factors, we found that the cost of caring for people with diabetes increased with suboptimal glycemic control, proteinuria, and worsening kidney function. Future studies should assess whether strategies to improve these laboratory measures lead to reduced costs.