The intestinal epithelium is organised into two functionally distinct compartments: the invaginating crypts of Lieberkuhn that contain stem cells and villus protrusions formed primarily from differentiated enterocytes. The Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway drives differentiation and proliferation within the crypt compartment. NoneIn the absence of Wnt ligand, the cytoplasmic beta-catenin protein is targeted for ubiquitin-mediated degradation by a multi-protein complex including the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) tumor suppressor protein. NoneWnt signaling inhibits beta-catenin turnover, leading to its accumulation and translocation to the nucleus where it complexes with the T-cell factor/lymphoid enhancing factor (TCF/LEF) transcription factors to induce transcription of genes includingascl2,axin2andc-myc. NoneThe importance of Wnt signaling for intestinal development has been demonstrated using both mouse models and organoid culture models. None-NoneInducible deletion of beta-catenin led to a rapid and complete destruction of the crypt compartment that correlated with a reduction in cell proliferation and the terminal differentiation of stem cells. NoneThe loss of intestinal crypts was similarly observed in transgenic mice lacking Tcf4 and in animals over-producing the extracellular Wnt signaling inhibitor Dickkopf-1 (Dkk-1). None,NoneIn vitro, theWnt pathway activator R-spondin1 was required for the survival and development of intestinal organoids in culture. NoneMutations that constitutively activate canonical Wnt signaling constitute the most prevalent genetic abnormality in human colon cancer where more than 90% of tumours contain mutations that activate the pathway. NoneMutations to beta-catenin prevent the phosphorylation of N-terminal serine and threonine residues (S33, S37, T41, S45) that are required for turnover leading to ligand-independent expression of the Wnt target genes. NoneHaradaet al. showed that Cre-loxP deletion of exon 3 of beta-catenin (including S33, S37, T41, S45 sequences) induced the formation of adenomatous intestinal polyps. NoneWonget al. failed to identify tumour formation following expression of a beta-catenin transgene lacking the 89 N-terminal amino acids (DeltaN89beta-catenin), but did observe increased crypt cell proliferation and apoptosis accompanied by a slowing of the cell migration within the crypt/villus axis. NoneRomagnoloet al. created a transgenic mouse model expressing a DeltaN131 beta-catenin protein and identified a similar increase in apoptosis along with multifocal dysplastic regions in the small intestine. NoneTaken together, these results confirm the importance of the Wnt pathway and suggest that stabilization of beta-catenin can be an initial step leading to colorectal cancer. While the initiation of colorectal cancer following beta-catenin mutation has been studied in detail, the more clinically important process of blocking oncogenic signaling has not been followed. Here, we have characterised for the first time the regression of an intestinal hyperplasia using a doxycycline-dependent mouse model expressing mutant beta-catenin. Timecourse analyses showed a surprisingly rapid restoration of the normal intestinal phenotype. In crypt organoidsin vitro, mutant beta-catenin was required for Wnt gene expression and cell survival. Transcriptional responses to the inhibition of Wnt signaling were extremely rapid. Loss of mutant beta-cateninin vivoresulted in an active inhibition of target gene expression within 24 hours while a small molecule inhibitor of Wnt signaling blocked targets within 4 hours. The combinedin vitro/in vivomodels we describe should allow the early assessment of compound efficacy in drug discovery programmes and emphasizes the importance of studying anti-Wnt signaling therapeutics at very early times after administration. A doxycycline-responsive promoter regulating expression of DeltaN89-betacatenin was targeted downstream of the collagen 1a1 locus by FLP-FRT site directed recombination. NoneThe targeted ES cells already contained the doxycycline-regulated transactivator M2-rtTA gene under the control of the constitutively active ROSA26 promoter (Figure 1A). NoneThree out of three analyzed clones were found to have integrated the transgene correctly and expression of the DeltaN89beta-catenin protein was dependent on doxycycline addition (Supplementary figure 1A and B). Mice were generated by diploid blastocyst injection. Following 10 days treatment with 2mg/ml doxycycline in the drinking water, the expression of DeltaN89beta-catenin protein was noted in different tissues in mice, including skin, liver, lung, stomach and intestine (Supplementary figure 1C). The global tissue transgene expression didn't affect the animals over the time-scale of the assays since the mice were viable after 15 days of treatment. The intestinal expression of DeltaN89beta-catenin mRNA in Tet-ODeltaN89beta-catenin-rtTA mice was strongly induced (11,000-fold) 10 days after doxycycline treatment (p=0.03, Mann Whitney, n=4;Figure 1B). Mutant beta-catenin mRNA was undetectable in the intestine samples from untreated mice (Supplementary figure 2A). Western blot analysis of intestinal tissues using the Myc epitope tag antibody showed the presence of DeltaN89beta-catenin protein in doxycycline treated Tet-ODeltaN89beta-catenin-rtTA mice, but not in control or untreated mice (Figure 1C). Immunolocalisation showed cytoplasmic, but not nuclear, DeltaN89beta-catenin expression within both the crypt and villus compartments of doxycycline-treated Tet-ODeltaN89beta-catenin-rtTA mice (Figure 1DandSupplementary figure 2B). Nuclear accumulation of beta-catenin was noted in the crypts of doxycycline-treated Tet-ODeltaN89beta-catenin-rtTA mice (Figure 3C) and was similarly observed in Cre+APCfl/flmice following beta-napthoflavone intra-peritoneal injections (Supplementary figure 2C). Taken together, these observations show low background levels and a strong induction of DeltaN89beta-catenin expression following doxycycline treatment. The timecourse of responses to the removal of DeltaN89beta-catenin was determined by removing doxycycline from the water of Tet-ODeltaN89beta-catenin mice that had been induced for 10 days. mRNA and protein expressions were assessed after 1, 2, 7 or 14 days of doxycycline removal. DeltaN89beta-catenin mRNA reverted to control levels within 1 day of doxycycline removal (p=0.11, Mann Whitney, n=4) (Figure 2A). The rapid loss of DeltaN89beta-catenin mRNA expression was not unexpected since the half-life of doxycycline in mouse serum is estimated to be 3 hours, suggesting that at least 99% of serum doxycycline would be excreted after 1 day. NoneWestern blot analyses also showed a rapid loss of DeltaN89beta-catenin protein since protein was not detectable 1, 2, 7 or 14 days following doxycycline withdrawal (Figure 2B). The rapid loss of DeltaN89beta-catenin, despite it being a stabilized form of beta-catenin, was compatible with the previous work since the half-life of truncated beta-catenin in melanoma cells has been estimated to be approximately 4.5 hours by comparison with 2 hours for the wild-type protein. NoneThe rapidity of the biological response is clear, but finer details of the dyamics are dependent on a complex interplay between the DeltaNu89beta-catenin mRNA decay rate, intestinal doxycycline levels and the threshold for Tet-O-promoter activity in each intestinal cell type. Histological analysis of the intestine samples from 10 day-induced DeltaN89beta-catenin mice revealed an enlarged crypt compartment (Figure 3Ai). The number of cells per half-crypt was 29.0+/-4.0 in inducedversus15.4+/-0.4 in control animals (p=0.03, Mann Whitney, n=4) (Figure 3Aii). The expansion of the crypt compartment was associated with increased cell proliferation. Crypts from induced Tet-ODeltaN89beta-catenin-rtTA mice showed raised levels of the S-phase marker Ki-67 and higher number of mitotic figures (5.84+/-0.49%versus2.83+/-0.2% in control half-crypts p=0.03, Mann Whitney, n=4;Figure 3Bandsupplementary figure 3). Apoptotic cell death as followed by active caspase-3 staining trended higher in doxycycline treated crypts, but this was not statistically significant (38.8+/-22.0 positive cells per 50 half crypts for Tet-ODeltaN89beta-catenin-rtTA mice and 5.6+/-1.8 for control mice; p=0.19, Mann Whitney, n=5;Figure 5A and 5B). Active caspase-3 cells in mutant crypts were localized all along the enlarged crypt axis, in contrast with restricted apoptosis in the bottom of control crypts (Supplementary figure 4). Intestinal differentiation processes were partly altered following doxycycline treatment in Tet-ODeltaN89beta-catenin-rtTA mice. While the percentage of goblet and paneth cells per crypt was not changed (Supplementary figure 5), the cellular localization of paneth cells within the crypt compartment was strongly modified and was now distributed throughout the crypt-like area rather than being confined to their normal position at the crypt base (Supplementary figure 6). After 10 days doxycycline treatment, the body weight of Tet-ODeltaN89beta-catenin-rtTA mice was reduced by 13.8% compared to control mice (26.1+/-0.6g for control, 22.5+/-0.8g for mutant; p less than 0.01, Mann Whitney, n=22-25;Supplementary figure 7). To confirm the involvement of the Wnt pathway in these profound changes, the accumulation of beta-catenin in the nucleus of crypt cells was analysed by immunohistochemistry using an antibody recognizing both endogenous and truncated beta-catenin and the expression of known Wnt target genes was studied by qRT-PCR. As expected, after 10 days doxycycline treatment, a high number of cells in hyperproliferative crypts showed nuclear accumulation of beta-catenin in Tet-ODeltaN89beta-catenin-rtTA mice (Figure 3C). In addition, the majority of the Wnt target genes (Ascl2,Axin2,c-mycandEphb2but notLgr5andTiam1) were up-regulated (Figure 3D). The level of endogenous beta-catenin mRNA was not altered following 10-days doxycycline treatment in Tet-ODeltaN89beta-catenin-rtTA mice (data not shown). In contrast to the phenotype seen in intestinal crypts, we did not observe any changes in the villus compartment 10-days after doxycycline treatment of Tet-ODeltaN89beta-catenin-rtTA mice even although DeltaN89beta-catenin protein was expressed in the villus (Figure 1D). The number of cells per half-villus was similar in control (86.7+/-4.3) and Tet-ODeltaN89beta-catenin-rtTA (98.7+/-4.8) mice (p=0.09, Mann Whitney, n=5) (data not shown) and the villus cell marker alkaline phosphatase was expressed at similar levels in both groups of mice (data not shown). Lastly, no Ki-67 stained proliferating cells were detected in DeltaN89beta-catenin expressing or control villus tissues (Figure 3B). The effect of reversal of the Wnt pathway was rapid. After one day of doxycycline withdrawal, the crypt compartment of Tet-ODeltaN89beta-catenin-rtTA mice was reduced in size and by day 7, crypts from mutant mice were histologically indistinguishable from control crypts (Figure 4A). No statistically significant differences in cell numbers were noted between control and mutant mice after 1, 2, 7 or 14 days of doxycycline removal (Figure 4B). The rapid reduction in crypt cell number was associated with an equally rapid reduction in crypt cell proliferation. After 1-day without doxycycline, the Ki67-positive compartment in Tet-ODeltaN89beta-catenin-rtTA mice was still enlarged by comparison with controls (Figure 4C), but no significant difference were noted between the number of Ki67-positive cells and mitotic figures in crypts from control and Tet-ODeltaN89beta-catenin-rtTA mice (Figure 4Dandsupplementary figure 3). Two days after doxycycline removal, no significant difference were observed between the number of Ki67-positive cells and mitotic figures in control and Tet-ODeltaN89beta-catenin-rtTA mice (Figure 4C, 4Dandsupplementary figure 3). After 7 and 14 days without doxycycline, the number of Ki67-positive and mitotic cells in the intestine was similar between control and Tet-ODeltaN89beta-catenin-rtTA mice (Figure 4C, 4Dandsupplementary figure 3). The rapid decrease of cell number in the crypt compartment of Tet-ODeltaN89beta-catenin-rtTA mice following doxycycline removal was associated with raised levels of apoptosis (Figure 5A and 5B). The number of caspase-3 positive cells in 50 half-crypts, including data from both 1-day and 2-day doxycycline removal, was 14.6+/-3.1 for Tet-ODeltaN89beta-catenin-rtTA mice and 6.0+/-1.1 for control mice (p=0.03, Mann Whitney, n=10;Figure 5B). The localization of active caspase-3 cells in mutant crypts was mainly observed at the bottom of the crypt following 1-day and 2-day doxycycline removal (Supplementary figure 4). The localization of paneth cells in mutant mice reverted into a normal position at the crypt base 7 days following doxycycline removal (Supplementary figure 6). The removal of doxycycline was associated with profound alterations of gene expression in the intestine. Quantitative RT-PCR analysis showed that multiple Wnt target genes were actively down-regulated 1 day after doxycycline removal in Tet-ODeltaN89beta-catenin-rtTA by comparison with controls (Figure 5C). After 2-days,Axin2, C-myc, Ephb2andLgr5were still significantly repressed while expression levels were similar between mutant and control animals by 7 and 14 days following doxycycline withdrawal. The restoration of normal intestinal morphology by 7 days after doxycycline removal correlated with a recovery in body weight (Tet-ODeltaN89beta-catenin-rtTA 26.4+/-0.4g versus control 27.0+/-0.5g, p=0.67, Mann Whitney, n=8) (Supplementary figure 7). To develop a system that allowed a kinetic analysis of early changes during oncogenic reversal, the tetracycline-inducible model was adapted for use with a recently describedin vitrocrypt culture technique. NoneThe potential toxicity of doxycycline was first analysed using Axin2-LacZ organoids in the presence of R-spondin. At 2mug/ml, doxycycline did not affect normal organoid growth or expression of Axin2-LacZ in the crypt compartment (Supplementary figure 8). As previously described, the growth of the crypt culture organoids was dependent on the presence of the Wnt signaling regulator R-spondin (Figure 6A). NoneIntestinal organoids cultured in the absence of R-spondin failed to develop crypt domains and instead formed spherical structures at 3 days that subsequently degenerated with high levels of cell death from 4-5 days (Figure 6A). However, in the absence of R-spondin, treatment with doxycycline (2mug/ml) rescued the organoids from cell death (Figure 6A). In this context, doxycycline induced expression of high levels of DeltaN89beta-catenin mRNA (29,000-fold; p=0.003, t-test, n=3) and activated Wnt target gene expression (Figure 6B and 6C). Interestingly, the doxycycline/DeltaN89beta-catenin-rescued organoids formed abnormal crypts that lacked the characteristic tear-shaped structures observed in normal tissues and control organoids. These doxycycline-rescued structures contained goblet cells, in contrast with Cre+APCfl/florganoids (Supplementary figure 9). In addition, the doxycycline-stimulated structures showed low but uniform levels of Axin-2-lacZ expression as compared to the localized expression of Axin2-lacZ in the lower crypt region of uninduced structures treated with R-spondin (Figure 6A). To recapitulate thein vivoeffect of doxycycline removal, doxycycline-containing culture medium was removed from the matrigel-embedded structures for 24 hours after an initial 48 hours of doxycycline treatment. Under these conditions DeltaN89beta-catenin mRNA levels were significantly reduced (p=0.02, t-test, n=3) leading to a strong reduction in Wnt target gene expression (Figure 6B and 6C). CCT036477 is a recently identified small-molecule inhibitor of Wnt-signaling that induced head and tail patterning defects in zebrafish embryos and inhibited the growth of colon cancer cell lines. NoneTet-ODeltaN89beta-catenin-rtTA organoids were treated with 2mug/ml doxycycline for 72 hours, in the presence of 20uM CCT036477 for 4, 8, 12 and 24 hours. No effect of CCT036477 was noted on the levels of 3 control RNAs (Supplementary figure 10). The strongest inhibitory response was observed after 4 hours of CCT036477 exposure. The majority of the Wnt target genes (Ascl2, Ephb2, Lgr5andTiam1) were down-regulated by 60-90% (Figure 7). Ascl2,Ephb2andLgr5levels after 4 hours of compound treatment were similar to that following 24 hours of doxycycline removal suggesting that CCT036477 treatment was as effective as lowering beta-catenin levels by 75% (Figure 7). However, CCT036477 didn't strongly affectAxin2orC-mycexpression. The reason that all Wnt targets were not similarly affected is unclear but may be related to the presence of multiple cell types that have different thresholds for Wnt responsiveness. After 8 and 12 hours of CCT036477 exposure, inhibitory effects decreased and were weak by 24 hours of exposure (Figure 7). The reason for this loss of response is unclear but may be related to the stability of the compound in culture or to a time-dependent oscillation of transcript levels since a similar time-dependence was observedin vivofollowing doxycycline-removal (Figure 5C). A similar type of response was observed in culture with another molecule that has more stable properties. Interestingly, this small-molecule Wnt inhibitor recapitulated thein vitroresponses in thein vivosystem (unpublished data). The majority of human colorectal cancers are initiated by inappropriate activation of the Wnt pathway. NoneMechanisms that alter Wnt signaling involve the inactivation of the APC tumour suppressor or the stabilization of beta-catenin by mutation of residues within its N-terminus. None,NoneSeveral genetically encoded mouse models of Wnt pathway deregulation in the intestine have been established. None,None,NoneBoth forced expression of DeltaN89beta-catenin or conditional Apc deletion result in enlarged crypt compartments and increased levels of cell proliferation and apoptosis. None,None,NoneIn the present study, doxycycline-dependent expression of DeltaN89beta-catenin was associated with comparable alterations suggesting that the doxycycline-inducible model system recapitulated early abnormalities that lead to colorectal-cancer. The expression of DeltaN89beta-catenin did not change villus morphology or proliferation, suggesting that differentiated villus cells are unable to re-enter the cell cycle or to de-differentiate. Similar observations were made following DeltaN89beta-catenin expression in villus cells directed by the Fabp1 promoter. NoneThe aim of thein vivostudy was to analyse the consequences of Wnt pathway inhibition in the mouse intestine since the removal of doxycycline should behave as an 'ideal' therapeutic modulator and should reverse oncogenic signaling, but not interfere with the restoration of normal crypt function. A combination of histological and molecular markers showed that ongoing DeltaN89beta-catenin expression in mice was necessary for the maintenance of the hyperplastic crypt phenotype and that loss of expression initiated a rapid cascade of responses that restored normal crypt morphology within 7 days (Figure 4). Of particular note, Wnt target gene expression rapidly dropped to a level 3 to 8 times lower than the control epithelium within 24 hours. A feature of Wnt signaling is the role of multiple Wnt transcriptional targets (Eg. Dkk1, Axin2, beta-TrCP, Nkd, TCF-1) in negative feedback inhibition of signaling through mechanisms including the blocking of Wnt receptor function and the stabilisation of the destruction complex. None,NoneHere, we speculate that feedback Wnt inhibitor proteins accumulate following DeltaN89beta-catenin expression and act to repress basal levels of Wnt signaling below levels in normal tissues after doxycycline removal. Interestingly, the pattern of Wnt target gene expression observed inFig.5Bshows characteristics of a time-dependent dampened wave that might result a feedback inhibition mechanism that showed a degree of overcompensation. An important question concerns the mechanism(s) involved in the rapid loss of crypt cells after Wnt pathway inhibition. In our study, about 70% of excess crypt cells were lost within 24 hours of doxycycline withdrawal, suggesting that even earlier experimental time points might be useful to understand the earliest processes. We noted raised levels of apoptosis in the intestine 1 and 2 days after doxycycline removal. Raised levels of apoptosis were recently observed following treatment of acute myeloid leukemia cells with small molecule inhibitors of Wnt signaling and were associated with decreased expression of Wnt target proteins, such as C-myc. NoneSimilarly, treatment of numerous cancer cell lines, including breast, lung, mesothelioma and sarcoma, with a monoclonal anti-Wnt-1 antibody induced apoptosis and down-regulation of Wnt pathway targets. NoneThese results suggest that the down-regulation of Wnt signaling enhances intestinal apoptosis during the reversal of the hyperplastic intestinal phenotype. However, it is important to note that the relationship between Wnt pathway activity and apoptosis is not always clear since Kuhnertet al. observed that Dkk-1 adenoviral expression in mice repressed intestinal epithelial proliferation and Wnt target gene expression, but did not modify apoptotic levels. NoneCell proliferation in the intestine was rapidly suppressed following doxycycline withdrawal in Tet-ODeltaN89beta-catenin-rtTA mice. However, although the hyperplastic phenotype was rapidly reversible, it is unknown whether polyp development or colorectal cancers generated by multiple cooperating mutations would be similarly dependent on continued Wnt signaling. Recently, using colorectal cancer cells containing a doxycycline-inducible beta-catenin shRNAs system, Scholer-Dahirelet al. demonstrated that sustained Wnt pathway activation was required for the maintenance of APC-mutated colorectal tumors in immuno-compromised mice. NoneSimilarly, Guntheret al. used a doxycycline-inducible approach to conditionally express the Wnt1 oncogene in the mammary gland. NoneThey noted that Wnt1-initiated mammary tumors completely regressed following doxycycline withdrawal. Costeet al. demonstrated that an oncogenic beta-catenin allele that was expressed sporadicallyin vivodid not result in intestinal tumourigenesis and speculated that beta-catenin's oncogenic effect may require the presence of a field of mutant cells termed betafield cancerizationbeta. NoneStudies of mutant beta-catenin in melanoma by contrast suggest that a 'just right' level of beta-catenin expression (neither too high or low) may be necessary for tumourigenesis. NoneFuture studies will be needed to determine whether intestinal tumors derived in the Tet-ODeltaN89beta-catenin-rtTA background will be similarly dependent on the maintenance of mutant beta-catenin expression. The aim of thein vitrostudy was to develop a crypt culture system that allowed a kinetic analysis of early changes during oncogenic reversal. Tetracycline-driven DeltaN89beta-catenin expression replaced the requirement for the Wnt pathway activator R-spondin in the growth of intestinal organoids, presumably by inducing expression of Wnt target genes required for cell survival. However, DeltaN89beta-catenin over-expression did not fully recapitulate the normal crypt morphology induced by R-spondin. Several explanations may account for the different phenotypes. Firstly, doxycycline-induced DeltaN89beta-catenin expression was probably expressed throughout the cultured crypts while R-spondin has been shown to enhance endogenous Wnt signals that may be localised to paneth cells at the base of the crypt. None,NoneThis contention is supported by the observation that Axin-2-lacZ was localized in R-spondin treated structures but was broadly expressed when replaced by doxycycline-induced beta-catenin expression. Secondly, DeltaN89beta-catenin over-expression may insufficient to a high enough level of Wnt target gene expression to drive a normal development program. The developmental and oncogenic outcomes of deregulated Wnt signaling vary from tissue to tissue and can be highly dependent on the absolute level of TCF-dependent transcriptional activity. NoneLastly, expression of DeltaN89beta-catenin may be unable to rescue branches of non-canonical Wnt signaling that are responsible for morphological aspects of crypt development. None,NoneUsing thein vitrosystem a small molecule Wnt pathway inhibitor was shown to down-regulate DeltaN89beta-catenin-driven Wnt target gene expression. The early time-point of maximal Wnt-target transcriptional response (4 hours) emphasises the importance of early analysis of drug action since the later responses may be masked by compound clearance/degradation. The early timescale of responsesin vitrocorresponded well with the rapid responses observedin vivowhere maximal responses were observed within 24 hours of doxycycline removal. Importantly, at later timesin vivo, responses to compound may be obscured by a rebound in target transcripts levels that accompanies the restoration of normal levels of signaling. In conclusion, we have shown that Wnt pathway up-regulation induced a proliferative response in the intestine, and that the reversal of Wnt signaling rapidly restored the initial structure of the intestine. These observations provide evidence that down-regulation of the Wnt pathway has potent anti-hyperplastic activitiesin vivo. Targeting oncogenic mutations involving the Wnt pathway, using a specific therapy, may therefore reverse an abnormal phenotypein vivo. As observed in this Tet-O mouse model, the effect of a betagold standardbeta treatment targeting the Wnt pathway should induce an almost immediate response, with the first effects on target gene expression being observed within 24 hours. Similarly, thein vitrosystem demonstrates that transcriptional response associated with the inhibition of Wnt signaling should be studied at early timepoints. These combinations of thein vitroandin vivomodels provide a complementary pair of approaches for the discovery of inhibitors of Wnt signaling and intestinal tumourigenesis. For the first time these constitute a reversible system that can be used to characterize the early-stage compound efficacy before time-consuming medicinal chemistry is deployed to optimize hit compound pharmacodynamics. The pBS31 flp-in vector was engineered to contain the following four cassettes. The pgk promoter followed by an ATG and an FRT site. A splice acceptor double polyA cassette derived from the ROSA26 target vector. The CMV minimal promoter containing tetracycline response operator sequences from pTETOP and an SV40 polyA signal. None,None,NoneThis aid rapid cloning of longer cDNAs, pBS31pgkATGFRTTet-O was converted into a gateway destination vector at the EcoR1 site. Human N-terminal myc-tagged DeltaN89beta-catenin cDNA was introduced into the vector by gateway cloning. Constructs were introduced into KH2 embryonic stem (ES) cells containing M2-rtTA under control of the endogenous ROSA26 promoter as described previously. NoneMice were generated by diploid blastocyst injection into 3.5dpc blastocysts from C57/Bl6-J females. Approximately 30 injected blastocysts were transferred into pseudopregnant CD1 recipient females (Transgenic Facility, Wales Gene Park). Chimeras were crossed with C57/BL6-J mice. The full method is described insupplementary method 1. Organoid culture was conducted as previously described. None,NoneCrypts were released from small intestine tissue fragments by incubation for 30 min at 4 degrees C in 2mM EDTA-PBS solution. Isolated crypts were mixed with 50 mul of Matrigel (BD Biosciences), seeded in 24-well plates and 500 mul of crypt culture medium (DMEM/F12 containing 50 ng/ml EGF (Sigma), 100 ng/ml Noggin (Peprotech) and 600 ng/ml R-spondin 1 (R D)) was added. Organoids were maintained in a 37 degrees C humidified atmosphere under 5% CO2. Induction of DeltaN89beta-catenin expression in ES cells was achieved by culturing cells with 2mug/ml doxycycline (Sigma) for 2 days. Forin vivoinduction, eight-week-old mice were fed 2mg/ml doxycycline and 10mg/ml sucrose in their drinking water for 10 days. Doxycycline was then withdrawn for periods up to 14 days (n=4-6 for each group). Mice negative for Tet-ODeltaN89 beta-catenin and/or rtTA were used as controls. Forin vitroexperiments, organoids were seeded in 24-well plates and 500mul of R-spondin 1-free crypt culture medium containing 2mug/ml doxycycline was added. After 2 days, culture medium was replaced by fresh medium containing 2mug/ml doxycycline (for 24 hours), both 2mug/ml doxycycline (for 24 hours) and 20muM CCT036477 (for 4, 8, 12 and 24 hours) or no doxycycline (for 24 hours) (n=3). Tet-ODeltaN89beta-catenin-rtTA mice were crossed with Axin2-LacZ mice, a direct reporter of canonical Wnt pathway activity. Nonebeta-Galactosidase staining was conducted as previously described. NoneProteins were extracted by scraping lysed ES cells from a confluent 10cm2plate or by crushing liquid nitrogen-frozen intestinal tissues using a mortar and pestle. Equal amounts of cellular protein (80mug) were separated on a 4-12% Bis Tris Gel (Invitrogen) and transferred onto nitrocellulose membranes. Immunoblotting utilised antibodies against the myc epitope tag (1:1000, Sigma) and GAPDH as a protein loading control (1:5000, Chemicon). Tissues were fixed in 10% formalin, paraffin embedded and cut into 5mum sections for immunostaining. Briefly, slides were boiled for 20 min in antigen retrieval solution (Dako) followed by blocking in 0.3% hydrogen peroxide for 5 min, avidin/biotin solutions for 30 min (Vector) and goat serum for 45 min (Vector). Slides where then incubated overnight with rabbit primary antibodies directed against Ki67 (1/500, Millipore), lysozyme (1/400, Dako), mucin2 (1/500, Santa Cruz), myc epitope tag (1/1500, Sigma), beta-catenin (1/100, Cell Signaling) or active caspase 3 (1/750, R D Systems). After 1-hour incubation with rabbit biotinylated secondary antibody, detection was carried out using a Vectastain ABC kit (Vector) for 30 min and visualized with DAB substrate chromogen for 10 min (Sigma). For immunofluorescence, slides were treated as described above and were incubated overnight with anti-beta-catenin antibody (1/1000, BD Transduction Laboratories). Slides were then exposed to Alexa Fluor(r) 488 goat anti-mouse IgG (1/1000, Invitrogen) for 20 min and DAPI stained (1/5000). Fluorescent images were taken on an IX-71 inverted microscope (Olympus)viaan ORCA-ER camera utilising SimplePCI software (Hamamatsu Corporation). Illumination intensity, exposure, offset and gain settings were maintained between samples. Mitotic cells on H E-stained sections were scored as previously described. NoneFifty half-crypts were counted for each mouse (n=4-5 per group). In addition, the number of cells per villus was counted (50 half-villus, n=4-5 per group). Alkaline phosphatase staining was performed as described by the manufacturer (Fast Red Substrate System, Dako). Three to five mice of each genotype were harvested after 10-day doxycycline exposure and at 1, 2, 7, and 14 days following doxycycline removal. RNA was extracted from a 1cm portion of small intestine taken approximately 7 cm from the stomach and frozen in liquid N2. It is worth noting that intestinal RNA contains both crypt, villus and stromal/muscle tissues that dilute stem cell markers such as Lgr-5. The tissue was homogenized and RNA extracted using the RNeasy mini kit (Qiagen). DNA contamination was removed using the TurboDnase kit (Ambion). Forin vitroexperiments, matrigel was mechanically dissociated and organoids were pelleted by centrifugation at 1000 rpm for 3 min. RNA was extracted using the RNeasy micro kit (Qiagen). For both in vivoandin vitroexperiments, 1mug of total RNA was reverse transcribed using random hexamers (Promega) and Superscript III reverse transcriptase (RT; Invitrogen). The qRT-PCR was performed using FastSybr Green Master Mix kit (Applied Biosystems). Duplicate samples were analysed on a StepOnePlus (Applied Biosystems) qRT-PCR machine using the fast protocol. beta-Actin, beta-2 microglobulin and keratin 20 primers were used to equalize the data. Threshold cycle (CT) values and the 2-DeltaDeltaCT method were used to calculate expression changes. Thesupplementary table 1contains the list of primers used in this study.