Since the first human gene therapy trial in 1989,Nonethere has been remarkable progress in both understanding the genetic basis of human disease and developing improved gene delivery vector systems to treat them. None-NoneFor the latter, clinical gene delivery to date has focused primarily on viral vehicles due to their evolved ability to efficiently transport genetic information to into cells. However, viral vectors still face a number of challenges including immunogenencity, targeted delivery, safe genome integration, and vector production. None-NonePseudotyping - the replacement of a virus' attachment protein with that of a different virus - has enabled progress in addressing several of these concerns. For example, vesicular stomatitis virus G glycoprotein (VSV-G) is the most widely used glycoprotein for retroviral and lentiviral vector pseudotyping, as it offers several advantages including effective delivery to a broad range of cell types, enhanced vector stability, and increased infectious titer. None,NoneThat said, VSV-G is cytotoxic to producer cells,Nonethough the use of tetracycline-regulating promoters has alleviated this problem and facilitated the generation of stable cell lines expressing VSV-G.NoneAs an additional problem, however, serum inactivation of VSV-G pseudotyped viral vectors impedes theirin vivouse. NoneThis inactivation is mediated by proteins of the complement cascade. In general, complement activation can occur via classical, alternative, and lectin pathways, and these systems are tightly regulated by the complement regulatory proteins (CRPs). NoneHowever, the precise mechanism of VSV-G inactivation and the protein regions involved are not known. Several approaches have been explored to overcome serum inactivation. Although known inhibitors of complement improve vector survival in serumin vitro,Nonesystemic delivery of complement inhibitors can be accompanied by toxicity. NoneIncorporating CRPs directly into a virus - including human decay-accelerating factor (DAF)/CD55 and or membrane cofactor protein (MCP)/CD46 - enhanced the resistance of the virus to human serum inactivation. None-NoneHowever, the efficiency of CRP incorporation into virions varied with the types of virus and producer cell, and the direct fusion of CRP to viral proteins resulted in low titers. As a result, only systemic use of modified adenovirus has been reported. NoneAs another approach, chemical "shielding" of VSV-G via bioconjugation of polyethylene glycol (PEG) or polyethylenimine enhanced the serum resistance of lentiviral vectors,None,Nonethough vector titer was reduced, and a chemical modification adds an additional step in vector production for clinical development. Alternatively, using different, serum-resistant glycoproteins - such as feline endogenous virus envelope protein RD114 or cocal virus envelopeNone,None- for pseudotyping could pose a solution. However, RD114 pseudotyping resulted in lower titers (approximately 100-fold) compared to the VSV-G pseudotyping, and its usein vivohas thus been somewhat limited to date. None,NoneFurthermore, the cocal envelope has not been testedin vivoto date, in contrast to the considerablein vivocharacterization of VSV-G. Finally, utilizing packaging cell lines in which alpha-galactosyl-transferase genes are disrupted can generate vector lacking galactosyl-alpha(1,3)galactose epitopes and thereby reduce sensitivity to human complement, through this approach has not been broadly explored. NoneDirected evolution has recently been developed and implemented to improve numerous properties of viral vectors, and this approach can be effective even in the absence of a mechanistic understanding of challenges facing a vector system. In particular, multiple studies have applied molecular evolution to improve vector stability, pseudotyping efficiency, transduction efficiency, resistance to antibodies, genomic integration selectivity, and other properties. None-NoneHere, we explore whether directed evolution of the VSV-G envelope may enable pseudotyped viral vectors to resist neutralization by human serum. Through a combination of evolution and site-directed mutagenesis, we created VSV-G variants that are both resistant to a panel of human and animal sera and are thermostable. Furthermore, variants exhibited enhanced gene delivery in the presence of human serumin vivo. VSV-G libraries were constructed by error-prone PCR at two different mutation rates: a 2 * 106mutant library with a low error rate of 1-4 nucleotide mutations per VSV-G sequence and a 2 * 105mutant library with 3-8 nucleotide mutations per sequence, as quantified by sequencing of randomly chosen clones. For selection, these libraries were inserted into a retroviral vector plasmid that was used to package a library of vector particles, where each harbored a vector genome encoding the VSV-G variant incorporated in the envelope of that particle. This requires that ~1 plasmid carrying a VSV-G variant be transfected into a producer cell during packaging. For initial optimization of this process, HEK 293T cells were transfected with 62.5 ng - 2 ug of the retroviral vector CLPIT-GFP followed by flow cytometry analysis (Supplementary data Fig. S1. ). Upon transfection with 62.5 ng of CLPIT-GFP, approximately 15% of cells expressed GFP, suggesting that these conditions may introduce on average less than 1 plasmid per cell and could thus produce the desired virion library. Therefore, the two CLPIT VSV-G libraries were packaged separately using these conditions, and the resulting vectors were combined for selection. To develop a strategy for selecting VSV-G variants resistant to serum neutralization, retroviral vector pseudotyped with wild type VSV-G was diluted fivefold in a mixture of human serum from 18 donors and incubated at 37 degrees C (Supplementary data Fig. S2. ). Vector infectivity progressively decreased with longer incubations, such that only ~5% of the vector remained infective after 6 hours. The VSV-G library was thus selected to evade human serum inactivation by incubating the virions with serum at 37 degrees C for 6 hours. 293T cells were then infected with the treated viral vector library (at a MOI less than 0.1 to prevent multiple infections of a single cell). Following selection with 1 ug/ml of puromycin, the selected viral pool was rescued via transfection of the pCMV gag/pol helper plasmid. This process was repeated for six selection steps, and VSV-G variants were then recovered from 293T cell genomic DNA via PCR and inserted into the plasmid pcDNA IVS to generate helper plasmids for vector production. DNA sequencing revealed that while there were no duplicates among 36 randomly chosen VSV-G clones, common mutations were present (Figure 1A;Supplementary data Fig. S3. ). The positions of these 'hot spot' mutations were analyzed within the structure of the prefusion form of VSV-G (Figure 1B),Nonewhich indicated that Lys66, Ser162, Asp208, Ser212, Lys216, Thr230, Thr368, and Glu380 are located on the protein surface. In addition, Thr344 is located in the core region, Ile98 and Phe125 are located on the leg region that points toward the viral membrane, and Phe470 is located on the transmembrane domain of VSV-G. The latter, non-solvent exposed residues (Thr344, Ile98, Phe125, and Phe470) would appear unable to interact with components of human serum, and the former set of mutations was instead investigated. As there were no dominant individual clones following selection, we analyzed the roles of the common mutations in potential VSV-G serum resistance. Site-directed mutagenesis was used to introduce the individual, identified point mutations into the surface-exposed positions of wild type VSV-G (Figure 1), and GFP-expressing retroviral vectors were packaged. We found that, with the exception of S162T, the genomic titers (G-titers) of mutant vectors were equivalent to wild type vector (Figure 2A) suggesting that VSV-G can tolerate mutations that emerged from this library selection without loss of assembly. The mutant infectious titers (I-titers) were similar to wild type, with the exceptions that VSV-G E380K exhibited a 40% increase, and K66T and T368A showed a 70% decrease, respectively, in infectivity (Figure 2B). We investigated the relative ratio of infectious titer to genomic titer of all mutant variants (Figure 2C Supplementary data Fig. S4C). Vector containing K66T, S162T, T230N, or T368A VSV-G showed somewhat lower I-titer/G-titer ratios compared to the wild type, suggesting that these mutations slightly decreased the infectivities of the viral vectors. We also investigated the relative ratio of VSV-G expression level, as obtained with a VSV-G ELISA assay, to G-titer (Figure 2C), and did not observe any significant differences compared to wild type VSV-G. The human serum inactivation of retroviral vectors bearing wild type and single mutant VSV-G variants was examined. Since non-infectious of empty particles could conceivably affect a neutralization assay, we used the results of a VSV-G ELISA assay (Supplementary data Fig. S4C.) to equalize the amount of VSV-G added to each sample. The resulting ELISA-normalized viral vectors levels were incubated with the mixture of human serum from 18 donors. Following serum incubation at 37 degrees C for 1 hr, titers were quantitated and reported as the percentage of remaining titer compared to that of control samples incubated at 37 degrees C for 1 hr with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) (pH 7.4) (Figure 3A) or heat inactivated (56 degrees C, 30 min) human sera (HIHS) (Supplementary data Fig. S5A). Viral vectors were not inactivated in HIHS, suggesting that the inactivation may be caused by complement (Supplementary data Fig. S5B), and the results of these two normalization were thus very comparable. In particular, individual VSV-G mutants S162T (p less than 0.05), T230N (p less than 0.05), or T368A (p less than 0.05) showed significantly increased human serum resistance compared to wild type VSV-G (Figure 3A). Incubation in serum at 37 degrees C may select not only for serum resistance but serendipitously also for thermostability, so we further examined the results for the vectors before and after incubation for 1 hr in PBS (Figure 3BFigure 3C). Based on these data, the S162T, T230N, and T368A mutations were deemed beneficial for serum resistance. Combining mutations that individually contribute to a given property can further enhance that property. None,NoneWe therefore generated a number of double and triple VSV-G mutants from individual mutations shown to confer serum resistance. All VSV-G mutants analyzed showed significantly higher resistance (p less than 0.01 or 0.05) to human serum (grey bars inFigure 4A). Furthermore, all such mutants showed similar thermal stability compared to wild type VSV-G (striped bars inFigure 4A). For comparison, we also prepared retroviral vector pseudotyped with an RD114 envelope, which has previously been reported to have higher serum resistance than wild type VSV-G,None,Noneas another control. As reported RD114 showed increased resistance to human serum compared to wild type VSV-G, though again this envelope cannot package vector to the high titers needed forin vivouse. NoneCollectively, the T230N + T368A mutant showed the highest residual infectivity (~68%) compared to the residual infectivity of parental VSV-G (~37%) and similar residual infectivity (~ 68%) of RD114 after incubation in human serum at 37 degrees C for 1 hr. K66T, T368A, and E380K mutations increased VSV-G thermal stability (Figure 3), and we thus investigated the effects of adding these mutations to the promising serum resistant variants. Several variants containing K66T or K66T + E380K substitutions showed similar or slightly higher thermal stability compared to wild type VSV-G, and several mutants (K66T + S162T + T230N + T368A, K66T + T368A + E380K, and K66T + S162T + T230N + E380K) also showed statistically higher serum resistance (p less than 0.05) (Figure 4B C). While the envelope compositions of retroviral and lentiviral vectors are likely similar, we also analyzed the ability of VSV-G variants to confer serum resistance to lentivirus. Based on results with retroviral vectors, we analyzed the top five VSV-G variants (S162T + T230N, S162T + T368A, T230N + T368A, K66T + T368A + E380K, and K66T + S162T + T230N + T368A) showing higher serum resistance for retrovirus. Equal amounts of packaged lentivirus (7 * 104GFP TU) were diluted fivefold in human serum, or PBS (pH 7.4) as a control, and incubated at 37 degrees C for 1 hr. Vector pseudotyped with several mutant VSV-G showed a greater resistance to human serum compared to wild type VSV-G pseudotyped lentiviral vector (Figure 5). Importantly, mutants T230N + T368A or K66T + S162T + T230N + T368A had higher combined thermostability and serum-resistance than wild type VSV-G.VSV-G pseudotyped viral vectors can be inactivated by sera from mouse, rat, and guinea pig, which can impact the interpretation of animal studies. None,NoneThe relative sensitivity of VSV-G pseudotyped retroviral or lentiviral vectors to several animal sera was thus tested (Figure 6A and 6B, respectively). S162T + T230N, T230N + T368A, or K66T + S162T + T230N + T368A VSV-G showed statistically higher resistance to mouse and rabbit sera for both retroviral and lentiviral vectors. While the infectivities of 293T cells were comparable to wild type VSV-G in the absence of human serum (Figure 2), we characterized transduction of several other cell lines to determine whether the mutations affected infectivity (Figure 7). While the infectivities of the variants were somewhat lower for several cell types, the trends in infectivity for all lines was similar between wild type and mutant VSV-G. Interestingly, the mutant carrying K66T + S162T + T230N +T368A showed statistically higher transduction efficiency to HeLa cells compared to wild type (p less than 0.01). The ability of two promising variants - which we now term mutant 1 (T230N + T368A) and mutant 2 (K66T + S162T + T230N + T368A) - to resist human serum neutralization in a murine model was analyzed. For thein vivoneutralization assays, vector could be added to 100% human serum; however, human serum administrationin vivoresults in a ~ tenfold dilution of the serum into circulation. To tune the level of vector that should be administered to observe neutralization, a preliminary study with wild type VSV-G was conducted, and the interval between serum and lentiviral vector administration was also varied. BALB/c mice were injected with 200 ul of human serum, or PBS as a control, into the tail vein. One, 5, or 24 hours later, lentiviral vector encoding firefly luciferase was administered. For an 8 * 1010vector genome administration, after two weeks expression was observed in the liver, the primary site of lentiviral vector transduction. NoneAlso, expression levels were lower for vector administered 1 or 5 hours, but not 24 hours, after infection of human serum, compared to the PBS control (data not shown). To assess neutralization of the VSV-G mutants, equal levels of lentiviral vector (8 * 1010vector genomes) were injected via the tail vein 1 hour after the administration of 200 ul of human serum or PBS. After two weeks, the mice were sacrificed, and luciferase expression levels were analyzed in liver. The presence of human serum reduced luciferase expression mediated by wild type VSV-G to only 22.1% of PBS-injected controls in liver. The human serum reduced mutants 1 and 2 to only 60% of PBS controls, levels that were nearly 3-fold higher than WT VSV-G under the same conditions (Figure 8). Due to their broad tropism and high stability, VSV-G pseudotyped retroviral and lentiviral vectors are promising vehicles for gene transfer genein vitroandin vivo. However, while VSV-G pseudotyped vectors have been increasingly explored forex vivogene delivery in clinical trials,None,Noneserum neutralization of the VSV-G pseudotyped viral vectors is a significant obstacle for direct,in vivoadministration. In this study, we conducted directed evolution of VSV-G to create serum-resistant VSV-G mutants. After 6 selection steps, followed by functional analysis of common mutations, we identified several mutations (S162T, T230N, and T368A) that enhanced VSV-G serum resistance. Furthermore, since incubation at 37 degrees C was inherent to the selection, we also identified several adventitious mutations (K66T, T368A, and E380K) that apparently increased VSV-G thermostability. Upon combining these two classes of mutations, retroviral and lentiviral vectors pseudotyped with two resulting VSV-G variants (T230N + T368A and K66T + S162T + T230N +T368A) showed higher resistance to human and animal sera as well as increased thermostability compared to wild type VSV-G. While adeno-associated virus (AAV) has been evolved to resist antibody neutralization,None,None,Noneto our knowledge this is the first effort to harness iterative random mutagenesis and selection to endow retroviral or lentiviral vectors with the capacity to resist serum inactivation. VSV-G pseudotyped viral vectors can be inactivated in serum by complement,None,Nonea major element of the innate immune response that in general functions via classical, alternative, and lectin pathways. NoneAll pathways can mediate virus opsonization, virolysis, and anaphylatoxin and chemotaxin production. However, the particular mechanisms by which complement inactivates VSV-G presenting virions are unknown. The mutation sites (Ser162, Thr230, and Thr368) we identified do not lie within several known antibody binding epitopesNone, indicating that these residues may lie in previously uncharacterized epitopes or that VSV-G may interact with complement via mechanisms independent of antibody neutralization. Despite the lack of mechanistic information underlying a given gene delivery problem, directed evolution can still be employed to create enhanced variants, which in this case could aid future efforts to investigate mechanisms of retroviral or lentiviral vector inactivation by complement. As a byproduct of the evolution, mutations that enhanced the thermal stability of VSV-G were also identified, which can potentially enhance vector production and reduce dosage of administration. The extracellular half-life of retroviral vectors lies between 3.5 hrs and 8 hrs at 37 degrees C,None,None,Noneand our measurement (t1/2= ~ 3 hrs) is close to this range. Therefore, our incubation of the library for 6 hours in human serum at 37 degrees C also selected for enhanced thermostability. An increased protein thermal stability can be caused by several factors such as disulfide bond formation, hydrophobic interactions, or change of electrostatic interactions of the surface. NoneThe E380K mutation in VSV-G may eliminate a like-charge repulsion with Asp381 and create opposite-charge attraction on the protein surface to confer thermostability to the protein. By comparison, potential mechanisms for K66T and T368A thermostabilization are not as readily apparent. At any rate, combining these mutations with others that conferred serum-resistance resulted in vectors with both properties. In particular, mutants 1 and 2 showed a two-fold increase in half-life at 37 degrees C (t1/2= ~ 6 hrs). These improvements of thermal stability may have also contributed slightly to a greater stability to vector concentration by ultracentrifugation (data not shown). Cocal-pseudotyped lentiviral vectors may have potential forin vivogene therapy, due to their high titers, broad tropism, stability, and reported increased resistance to human serum compared to VSV-G-pseudotyped vectors. NoneHowever, unlike VSV-G, theirin vivouse has not yet been reported. RD114-pseudotped vectors also exhibit resistance to human serum. Greenet al. conducted immunostaining for RD114 receptors,Nonewhich were present in colon, testis, bone marrow, skeletal muscle, and skin epithelia. However, the receptors are absent in lung, thyroid, and artery, suggesting that the application of RD114-pseudotyped vectors to treat some diseases may be limited. By comparison, VSV-G pseudotyped lentiviral vectors have potential for broad tropism. NoneIn this study, we evolved VSV-G and successfully created variants with higher resistance to human, rabbit, and mouse serain vitroand human serumin vivo. This work therefore further establishes the power of directed evolution to improve viral vectors, and these results may enhance the utility of retroviral and lentiviral vectors to treat human disease. In addition, vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) itself has emerged as a promising candidate in the field of oncolytic virus therapy. Therefore, incorporating a VSV variant encoding a human serum-resistant and thermostable VSV-G may enhance the therapeutic potential of VSV for treating human cancer. Random mutagenesis libraries were generated by standard error-prone PCR of a VSV-G template using VSV-G fwd and VSV-G rev as primers (seeSupplementary Table S1for all primer sequences). The amplified PCR fragments were digested withSfiI andXhoI, and the resulting fragments were ligated into the corresponding sites of the retroviral vector pCLPIT, which contains a puromycin resistance gene and places VSV-G under a tetracycline responsive promoter. HEK 293T cells were cultured in Iscove's modified Dulbecco's medium (IMDM) supplemented with 10% FBS (Invitrogen, Calrsbad, CA) and 1% penicillin/streptomycin (Invitrogen) at 37 degrees C and 5% CO2. The VSV-G library was packaged into retroviral vectors via calcium phosphate transfection of 62.5 ng of pCLPIT VSV-G Lib, 6 ug of pCMV gag-pol, and 14 ug of pBluescript II SK (Stratagene, Santa Clara, CA) in a ~ 80% confluent 10-cm dish of HEK 293T cells. The library vector supernatant was twice harvested, 2 and 3 days post-transfection, and then concentrated by ultracentrifugation. For selection, 18 individual human serum samples were obtained from Innovative Research, Inc. (Southfield, MI). The viral vector library was diluted fivefold in the pooled human serum and incubated for 6 hours at 37 degrees C. These viral vectors were used to infect 293T cells at a MOI of less than 0.1. The infected cells were selected and enriched using 1 ug/ml of puromycin for two or three weeks. Packaging-competent virus variants were rescued through transfection of pCMV gag/pol into the expanded 293T cells and concentrated by ultracentrifugation for the next round of screening. After 5 and 6 rounds of the selection process, genomic DNA of the infected 293T cells was extracted using the QIAamp(r) DNA Mini kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA). For sequencing of individual VSV-G clones, the VSV-G genes were amplified from this genomic DNA by PCR (using VSV-G IVS fwd and VSV-G IVS rev primers). The resulting PCR fragments were digested withEcoRI, and the fragments were ligated into the corresponding site of pcDNA IVS. NoneRandomly chosen clones were sequenced (with IVS seq fwd, IVS seq rev, and VSV-G seq in primers). Site-directed mutagenesis was conducted on the plasmid pcDNA IVS VSV-G using the QuickChange PCR-based technique, with Pfu polymerase and primers described inSupplementary Table S1. The amplified PCR products were treated withDpnI and propagated intoE. coliDH10B. Mutations were verified by DNA sequencing. The individual VSV-G mutant retroviral vectors were packaged with 10 ug of pCLPIT GFP, 6 ug of pCMV gag-pol, and 4 ug of pcDNA IVS VSV-G (or pcDNA IVS VSV-G mut) in a ~ 80% confluent 10-cm dish of HEK 293T cells. RD114 envelope pseudotyped retroviral vector was packaged with pcDNA IVS RD114 which was obtained by substitution of VSV-G gene by RD114 gene from pLTR-RD114A (Addgene, Cambridge, MA). The culture medium was changed 12 hours post-transfection, and the viral supernatant was collected both 24 h and 48 h later and concentrated by ultracentrifugation. To determine the titers of GFP-expressing vectors, 4 * 105293T cells were infected with at least three different volumes of vector supernatant or concentrate. The cells were assayed for GFP expression by flow cytometry 3 days after infection. Vector genomic titers were measured by real-time qPCR using the iCycler iQ Real Time Detection System (Bio-Rad) and SYBR Green I (Invitrogen) with primers 5'-ATTGACTGAGTCGCCCGG-3' (forward) and 5'-AGCGAGACCACAAGTCGGAT-3' (reverse). Individual VSV-G mutant lentiviral vectors were packaged with 10 ug of lentiviral transfer vector HIV-CSCG, 5 ug of pMDLg/pRRE, 1.5 ug of pRSV Rev, and 3.5 ug of pcDNA IVS VSV-G (or pcDNA IVS VSV-G mut) and a process similar to retroviral vector production. Lentiviral vectors harboring firefly luciferase were packaged with 10 ug of Fluc, 5 ug of pMDLg/pRRE, 1.5 ug of pRSV Rev, and 3.5 ug of pcDNA IVS VSV-G (or pcDNA IVS VSV-G mut). NoneIn addition to the 18 human serum samples were obtained from Innovative Research, Inc. (Southfield, MI), mouse and rabbit serum were purchased from Sigma (St. Louis, MO). Serum inactivation experiments were carried out as described previously with some modifications. NoneBriefly, 20 ul of viral vector normalized based on VSV-G ELISA data was diluted fivefold in human sera, heat-inactivated human sera (56 degrees C, 30 min), or PBS (pH 7.4) as a control. Each sample was incubated for 1 hour at 37 degrees C. All samples were then serially diluted and titered on 293T cells. Gene transfer was evaluated by flow cytometer for GFP expression 3 days after infection. To determine the change in titer after exposure to serum, the percentage of GFP-expressing cells for vector incubation in the serum was divided by the percentage of GFP-expressing cells for vector in PBS and reported as the percentage of titer recovery. To investigate thermal stability of the viral vectors, samples in PBS without incubation at 37 degrees C was used as a control. To evaluate the expression level of VSV-G of purified viral vectors the binding of viral vector populations to a VSV-G polyclonal antibody was monitored by ELISA. NoneMaxiSorp (Nunc) 96 well plates were coated at 4 degrees C overnight with 50 ul of viral vectors diluted in carbonate coating buffer (100 mM, pH 9.6) and washed three times with PBS (pH 7.4). The wells were blocked by adding 200 ul of PBS with 5% non-fat dry milk at room temperature (RT) for 2 hours and washed twice with PBS. 100 ul of biotin conjugated anti-VSV-G tag antibody (1:3,000) (Abcam, Cambridge, MA) in carbonate coating buffer was added. After incubation overnight at 4 degrees C, the plates were washed four times with PBS and 100 ul of streptavidin-alkaline phosphatase (1: 1,000) (Invitrogen) was added and incubated for 2 hours at RT. After four times washing with PBS, p-nitrophenly-phosphate (pNPP) substrate solution (Invitrogen) was added. Plates were read to determine the OD405after 30 min incubation at RT. To determine the relative transduction efficiencies the selected mutants compared to parental wild-type VSV-G pseudotyped retroviral vectors, HEK293T, CHO K1, NIH 3T3 (mouse embryonic fibroblast cell line), HeLa, and HT1080 cells were plated at a density of 4.0 * 105cells per well 24 hours prior to infection. Cells were infected with wild type or VSV-G variants pseudotyped retroviral vectors. The fraction of GFP positive cells was assessed 72 hours post infection using a Beckman-Coulter Cytomics FC-500 flow cytometer. Eight-week-old female BALB/c mice (Jackson Laboratories, Bar Harbor, ME;n= 4) were used for all experiments. 200 ul of pooled human serum, or PBS as a control, was administered into the tail vein with a 30-gauge needle. One hour after human serum or PBS introduction, recombinant lentiviral vectors carrying cDNA encoding firefly luciferase under the control of human ubiquitin promoter was injected into the tail vein. Two weeks after virus injection, animals were transcardially perfused with PBS, and liver was harvested and frozen. Frozen tissue samples were homogenized in 1* reporter lysis buffer (Promega, Madison, WI) and clarified by centrifugation for 10 min at 10,000 g. Luciferase reporter activities were determined as previously described,Noneand the luciferase signal was normalized to total protein content as determined by a bicinchoninic acid assay (Pierce, Rockford, IL). Animal protocols were approved by the UCB Animal Care and Use Committee and conducted in accordance with National Institutes of Health guidelines.