Polypeptides are crucial for transmission of biological information, and the messages encoded in amino acid sequences are often read by multiple partners, with divergent outcomes. NonePeptide hormones, growth factors, kinases, phosphatases, glycosyl transferases, transcriptional regulators, and many other signal-bearing or signal-reading proteins bind to specific partners in order to play their designated roles in information transfer pathways. NoneIn addition, polypeptides interact with proteases and peptidases, sometimes in highly specific ways for targeted cleavage,Noneand in more general ways for wholesale degradation. NoneThe adaptive immune system represents a polypeptide recognition network that features several different modes of evaluating peptidic information, including peptide presentation within major histocompatibilty class I or II (MHC I or II) complexes for interrogation by T-cell receptors (TCRs), and complexation to antibodies and B-cell receptors. NoneMany specific protein-protein recognition events are attractive targets for therapeutic intervention. NoneThe importance of such targets is illustrated by the commercial success of agents that block interactions of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) or tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNFalpha) with their cell-surface receptors, and agents that activate receptors for glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) or parathyroid hormone (PTH). NoneSuch drugs are usually themselves polypeptides; in addition to binding to their intended targets (e.g., VEGF, TNFalpha, or the receptor for GLP-1 or PTH), these polypeptides are subject to recognition and processing by proteases and various immune system components. These latter forms of recognition can be deleterious in terms of clinical applications: proteolysis can lead to poor drug pharmacokinetics, and immunological neutralization can result in a loss of drug efficacy over time. NoneThe high specificity of macromolecular recognition involving polypeptides has inspired efforts to identify unnatural oligomers that mimic the target specificity of prototype peptides or proteins but avoid enzymatic degradation mechanisms. Examples include oligomers ofd-alpha-amino acids ("d-peptides"),NoneN-alkyl-glycines ("peptoids"),Nonearomatic subunits,Nonebeta-amino acids ("beta-peptides")Noneand combinations of alpha- and beta-amino acids ("alpha/beta-peptides"). None-NoneMany such studies have focused on mimicry of a specific alpha-helix that mediates a particular protein-protein interaction. alpha/beta-Peptides appear to be especially well-suited for recapitulating the information encoded by an alpha-helix, particularly for helices comprising five or more turns. None,NoneFunctional alpha/beta-peptide analogues can be generated from an alpha-helix-forming sequence via periodic replacement of alpha residues with appropriately selected beta residues. NoneThe most straightforward replacement for a given alpha residue is the beta3homologue, that is, the beta residue that bears the original side chain on the backbone carbon adjacent to nitrogen. Three patterns of alpha - greater than beta replacement, alphaalphabeta, alphaalphaalphabeta or alphaalphabetaalphaalphaalphabeta, have been shown to support helical conformations that are very similar to the alpha-helix formed by conventional peptides and proteins. None,NoneOligomers based on these patterns contain 25-33% beta residues that are evenly distributed along the sequence; such backbones are often highly resistant to proteolytic degradation. None-NoneThe promising alpha-helix-mimetic properties of alpha/beta-peptides lead to a question: will such oligomers be subject to recognition by the immune system? The literature offers only limited insight on this possibility. Three groups have reported "beta3scan" studies based on epitopes known to form MHC I complexes; each member of a beta3scan set contains only one alpha - greater than beta3replacement. In the first such study, Guichard et al. evaluated the impact of single alpha - greater than beta3replacements in the peptide ALGIGILTV on binding to the human HLA-A2 MHC I. NoneModerate to strong binding was observed for nearly all members of the beta3scan set. Similarly, a beta3scan of the epitope RRFFPYYV by Reinelt et al. revealed that most single replacements did not impair binding to the human HLA-B*2705 MHC I molecule. NoneThis group went on to provide evidence that MHC I complexes formed by all members of the beta3scan set could engage the TCR on a cognate CD8+T-cell, as indicated by induction of target cell lysis; however, the alpha/beta analogues were 102- to 105-fold less effective than the alpha-peptide RRFFPYYV in this regard. Webb et al. conducted a beta3scan of the epitope SIINFEKL, which binds to the mouse H2-KbMHC I. NoneFour of the eight alpha - greater than beta3replacement analogues matched the prototype alpha-peptide in terms of MHC I affinity, and most of the remaining analogues retained measurable affinity. The susceptibility of these alpha/beta-peptide+MHC I complexes to recognition by two cognate TCRs was assessed by monitoring induction of IL-2 secretion upon exposure of T-cells to antigen-presenting cells that express H2-Kbafter the latter had been incubated with the alpha/beta-peptide. All peptides containing single alpha - greater than beta3replacements were able to elicit a response, although with varying efficacies; some members of the beta3scan set matched the original alpha-peptide. Two of the beta3-containing analogues of SIINFEKL were cocrystallized with H2-Kb, providing atomic-level insight on the accommodation of single unnatural residues by an MHC I partner. Collectively, these three studies indicate that MHC I binding is relatively forgiving toward many single alpha - greater than beta3replacements in peptide epitopes, and that many of the resulting MHC I complexes can engage cognate TCRs productively. Dali et al. evaluated aza-beta3-containing analogues of YALKRQGRTLYG in terms of binding to I-Ador I-EdMHC II (mouse). NoneThese studies included most of the single alpha - greater than aza-beta3replacements and a few analogues that contained two or three consecutive alpha - greater than aza-beta3replacements. In general, single replacements were well tolerated in terms of MHC II binding, but replacements in only the C-terminal region supported TCR recognition. These workers explored another aspect of immunological recognition by immunizing rabbits with the peptide YALKRQGRTLYG and determining whether analogues containing alpha - greater than aza-beta3replacements could compete with the original peptide for binding to the resulting antisera. Binding was quite strong for most replacements, but alpha - greater than aza-beta3replacement in the final three residues substantially impaired binding to the antisera. Based on the few available precedents, which are summarized above, it is difficult to predict the immunological consequences of alpha-helix-mimetic alpha/beta patterns that contain 20-40% alpha - greater than beta replacement. The degree to which single alpha - greater than beta substitutions have been tolerated in prior studies raises the possibility that the higher beta residue density of the alpha-helix mimics would support some form of recognition by the immune system. Understanding whether immune recognition mechanisms tolerate higher alpha - greater than beta replacement densities is important because beta residue proportions greater than 20%, with even beta distribution along the sequence, are likely to be required for robust resistance to proteolysis, as suggested by our own observationsNoneand by the relatively rapid degradation reported for peptides containing single alpha - greater than beta3or alpha - greater than aza-beta3replacements. NoneThe immunological consequences of structural modifications that modulate peptide susceptibility to proteolysis are of interest not only for designing therapeutic agents that target protein-protein recognition events but also for developing more effective peptide-based vaccines. NoneRecent studies of the effect of introducing noncanonical amino acid residues or amide bond mimics on ligand presentation in MHC complexes have provided insight into the importance of hydrogen bondingNoneand secondary structure formationNonein T-cell-mediated recognition, which provides additional context for our efforts to evaluate the impact of alpha - greater than beta backbone modification on immunological responses. Here we report experimental evaluation of the effects of multiple alpha - greater than beta substitutions, in either the alphaalphaalphabeta or alphaalphabetaalphaalphaalphabeta pattern, on several types of immunological recognition. A commercially available polyclonal antibody preparation that recognizes an 18-mer peptide corresponding to the human Bim BH3 domain was used to interrogate alpha/beta analogues. These studies were complemented by evaluating the recognition of human BimBH3 18-mer analogues by custom-produced chicken polyclonal antibodies raised against either the prototype alpha-peptide or an alpha/beta analogue. The generality of these findings was probed by characterizing the properties of custom-produced chicken polyclonal antibodies raised against an 8-mer peptide or alpha/beta analogues derived from murine secreted phospholipase-2 (sPLA2). In addition, a nine-residue viral epitope and alpha/beta analogues were evaluated for their ability bind H2-DbMHC I, induce interferon gamma responses in CD8+T-cells, and stimulate CD8+peptide-specific T-cell expansion in mice. The Bcl-2 homology domain 3 (BH3 domain) mediates interactions among pro- and antiapoptotic members of the Bcl-2 protein family. NonePro-apoptotic family members such as Bim, Puma, Bak, and Bax are bound by antiapoptotic family members such as Bcl-2, Bcl-xL, and Mcl-1 via association of the BH3 domain on the former with a complementary cleft on the latter. In the bound state, BH3 domains adopt an alpha-helical conformation. NoneFour key hydrophobic side chains are aligned along one side of this helix, and these side chains are accommodated by pockets in the floor of each BH3-recognition cleft. We previously examined alpha/beta analogues of the 18-residue Bim BH3 peptide1for the ability to bind to Bcl-xLand Mcl-1. NoneComprehensive evaluation of all possible analogues based on the alphaalphabeta3, alphaalphaalphabeta3, or alphaalphabeta3alphaalphaalphabeta3backbone pattern (14 alpha/beta-peptides in total) revealed two that retained affinity for both partner proteins. One of these dual-binding alpha/beta-peptides had the alphaalphabetaalphaalphaalphabeta pattern (2), and the other had the alphaalphaalphabeta pattern (3a). Co-crystal structures of2+Bcl-xLand3a+Bcl-xLrevealed in atomic detail the close match between the alpha/beta-peptide helices and the alpha-helix formed by the Bim BH3 domain itself. This conformational mimicry leads to similar three-dimensional presentations of key side chains from the original alpha-helix and the helices formed by the alpha/beta-peptides. We used a commercially available polyclonal rabbit antibody raised against the 36-mer AMASMRQAEPADMRPEIWIAQELRRIGDEFNAYYAR to probe for cross-reactivity between an alpha-peptide epitope and analogous alpha/beta-peptides containing multiple, regularly spaced alpha - greater than beta3replacements. The sequence of Bim BH3 alpha-peptide1is contained within the 36-mer (underlined). Polyclonal antibody preparations were used for these studies instead of monoclonal antibody because polyclonal antibodies provide a greater opportunity to observe cross-reactivity between antibodies and closely related peptide species. Control enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA) showed that at least a subset of the antibodies in the polyclonal commercial preparation could bind to immobilized 18-mer1(indirect ELISA). Moreover, this binding could be competitively disrupted if soluble1was introduced along with the polyclonal antibodies (competition ELISA). The ELISA format was used to ask whether alpha/beta-peptide2or any of the four possible 18-mers with the alphaalphaalphabeta3pattern,3a-d(Figure1), could be recognized by polyclonal anti-Bim BH3 antibodies. For the commercial BimBH3 antibody preparation, no antibody binding could be detected to immobilized samples of any of these five alpha/beta-peptides (Figure2a). In addition, none of these alpha/beta-peptides could competitively disrupt commercial antibody binding to immobilized1(Figure2b). Thus, although Dali et al. found that most analogues of 12-mer YALKRQGRTLYG containing a single alpha - greater than aza-beta3replacement could be recognized by polyclonal antibodies resulting from immunization with the alpha-peptide,Nonewe observe that making four or five evenly spaced alpha - greater than beta3replacements in an 18-mer sequence appears to eliminate polyclonal antibody recognition. Since two of the alpha/beta-peptides examined are known to mimic the alpha-peptide 18-mer in terms of recognition by partner proteins Bcl-xLand Mcl-1, our failure to detect antibody binding to these alpha/beta-peptides suggests that the antibodies mostly or entirely recognize a molecular surface different from that required for binding to Bcl-2-family proteins such as Bcl-xLor Mcl-1. Such a difference could arise if the conformation recognized by the antibodies is not alpha-helical. Circular dichroism measurements indicated that alpha-peptide1and alpha/beta-peptides2and3a-ddo not adopt a regular secondary structure in aqueous solution (Supporting InformationFigure S1). These results suggest that the failure of the polyclonal Bim BH3 antibody preparation to recognize alpha/beta-peptides2and3a-dis not due to changes in the extent or type of secondary structure sampled by these Bim BH3 alpha/beta analogues relative to the prototype alpha-peptide. alpha/beta-Peptide analogues of fragments derived from Bim BH3, sPLA2, and GP33 used in this study. (a) Structures of an alpha-amino acid residue and the homologous beta3-amino acid residue. (b) Sequences of Bim BH3-derived peptides. The conventional single-letter code is used to indicate alpha residue identity. Blue dots indicate sites of alpha - greater than beta3replacement; each beta3residue bears the side chain of the alpha-residue indicated by the letter. (c) Sequences sPLA2-derived peptides. Peptideent-4ais the enantiomer of4a. (d) Sequences GP33-derived peptides. Commercial polyclonal anti-BimBH3 antibody preparation binds to an alpha-peptide derived from BimBH3 (1) but not to alpha/beta homologues (2,3a-d). Data points represent mean +/- SD, with each condition run in duplicate. (a) Indirect ELISA analysis of anti-BimBH3 commercial antibody binding to immobilized synthetic BimBH3 analogues. Thex-axis represents the concentration of peptide in solutions used during the plate-coating step. "No peptide immobilized" is a negative control. (b) Competitive ELISA analysis of peptides in solution inhibiting the binding of commercial anti-BimBH3 antibody to immobilized peptide1. Thex-axis represents the concentration of peptide incubated with polyclonal antibody before adding this solution to wells containing immobilized alpha-peptide1. "No competition" denotes the absorbance observed when no competitor peptide was incubated with polyclonal antibody prior to addition. The red curve represents the fitting of a sigmoidal dose response model to the data for alpha-peptide1(IC50= 3 muM). None of the alpha/beta-peptide analogues inhibits binding to immobilized1at the highest alpha/beta-peptide concentration tested (43 muM). Experiments using commercial polyclonal Bim BH3 antibody indicate that antibodies capable of recognizing alpha-peptide1do not cross react with alpha/beta-peptides2or3a-d; however, these experiments do not test whether antibodies can be produced that recognize alpha/beta-peptides. We undertook a new set of experiments to address this question, and to determine whether antibodies specific for an alpha/beta-peptide would cross-react with a homologous alpha-peptide. Injecting female, laying chickens with short peptides conjugated to carrier proteins, which provide T-helper cell epitopes, along with Freund's adjuvant induces large quantities of antigen-specific IgY antibodies that can be harvested from eggs laid by these hens. NoneMinimally processed yolks from these eggs can be used in the ELISA format to detect production of peptide-specific polyclonal antibodies and to determine whether those peptide-specific antibodies recognize related molecules. We evaluated the abilities of alpha-peptide1or alpha/beta-peptide2to induce peptide-specific antibody responses using this approach. Control indirect ELISAs indicated that inoculation with alpha-peptide1or alpha/beta-peptide2conjugated to bovine gamma-globulin carrier protein induces the production of IgY antibodies capable of binding to the peptide antigen when that peptide has been conjugated to ovalbumin and immobilized. Egg yolks from control chickens injected with adjuvant but no peptide contained negligible amounts of antibodies with these recognition capabilities ("FCA" data points, Figure3a, b). Since identical chemistry was used to conjugate peptides to bovine gamma globulin for injection and to conjugate peptides to ovalbumin for ELISA it is possible that some of the response observed in these ELISA studies results from antibody recognition of cross-linker structure. This possibility was addressed with competition ELISA studies, in which interactions between antibodies and an immobilized peptide are assessed in the presence of a soluble peptide. If the soluble peptide binds to the antibodies, then antibody binding to immobilized peptide, which is detected in the ELISA, will be diminished. Since the soluble peptides we used did not contain the linker substructure, the competitive effects we observed must reflect binding to the antibodies mediated by the peptides themselves rather than linkers. Competitive ELISA using antibodies from a chicken injected with alpha-peptide1conjugated to the carrier show that free peptide1disrupts binding of these polyclonal antibodies (anti-1) to immobilized1more effectively than alpha/beta-peptide2disrupts this binding (Figure3c). Conversely, alpha/beta-peptide2is more effective than alpha-peptide1at disrupting interaction of anti-2with immobilized2(Figure3d). These results indicate that the polyclonal IgY antibody preparations contain significant capacity for recognition of the peptide used for immunization rather than the linker. In addition, the competitive ELISA data are consistent with the lack of cross-reactivity observed for commercial Bim BH3 polyclonal antibody with alpha/beta-peptide2. The data show that an alpha/beta-peptide hapten can induce a B-cell-mediated immune response, and that at least in this case the resulting antibodies show little cross-reactivity with the homologous alpha-peptide, which displays an identical side chain sequence. Inoculation of chickens with alpha-peptide1or alpha/beta-peptide2conjugated to bovine gamma-globulin with adjuvant stimulates production of peptide-specific responses ("anti-peptide" IgY antibodies). Association of antibody with immobilized peptide was evaluated only between an antibody and the peptide injected to stimulate production of that antibody. Data points in panels a-d represent mean +/- SD, with each condition run in duplicate. In all panels, the indicated peptides were conjugated to ovalbumin and were immobilized using a 1:100 dilution of the solution produced from the conjugation reaction. (a, b) Indirect ELISA analysis of IgY antibodies induced by injection of conjugated alpha-peptide1or alpha/beta-peptide2, respectively. Thex-axis represents the dilution of egg yolk used for each condition. Anti-1and anti-2data are from egg yolks of chickens injected with conjugated peptides1or2, respectively. "FCA" data points are generated using egg yolks from chickens injected only with Freund's complete adjuvant (FCA), which serve as negative controls. (c, d) Competitive ELISA analysis of peptides in solution inhibiting the binding of egg yolk-derived antibodies to immobilized alpha-peptide1or alpha/beta-peptide2, respectively. Thex-axis represents the concentration of peptide incubated with egg yolk preparations before adding this solution to wells containing immobilized peptides. Peptide4bis included as a negative control to account for nonspecific inhibition of antibody-peptide complex formation by a solution of unrelated peptide in DMSO. We used the chicken egg-ELISA approach described above to evaluate the properties of antibodies produced after injecting chickens with an array of peptide analogues derived from a fragment of murine secreted phospholipase-2 (sPLA2; alpha-peptide4a) conjugated to carrier protein. Control experiments showed that injecting adjuvant-emulsified, unconjugated peptide does not stimulate an increase in the titer of peptide-specific antibody (Supporting InformationFigure S2). We evaluated a set of sPLA2 fragment analogues in addition to alpha-peptide4a, including the related peptide4b(Cys6 - greater than Ser), five alpha/beta-peptide analogues (5and6a-d), and the enantiomer of4a(ent-4a) (Figure1), for their efficacy in stimulating peptide-specific IgY antibody responses. alpha/beta-Peptides5and6a-dcontain alphaalphabetaalphaalphaalphabeta (5) or alphaalphaalphabeta (6a-d) backbone patterns, which are analogous to the patterns used in Bim BH3-derived peptides2and3a-d, respectively. Protected beta3-homocysteine is not commercially available, so alpha/beta-peptide6ccontains beta3-homoserine rather than beta3-homocysteine, and alpha-peptide4bis the corresponding control compound. alpha/beta-Peptide6cwas not soluble under peptide conjugation conditions and was therefore not evaluated. We used indirect ELISA to assess whether antibodies specific for the peptidic haptens had been induced. Using varied dilutions of egg yolk or lyophilized egg yolk powder taken either from chickens that had been injected with hapten-carrier conjugate plus adjuvant or from control chickens that had been injected only with adjuvant, we observed that all hapten-injected chickens showed increased titers of antibody capable of binding to the immobilized peptide hapten used for immunization, as compared to control chickens (Figure4a). The egg yolk dilution curves produced were generally reproducible among multiple animals (n= 4) when the same preparation of conjugated peptide was used to inject these animals (Supporting InformationFigure S3a, b). Different peptides seemed to show varying efficacies for inducing production of peptide-specific antibodies; however, these variations are difficult to interpret because the efficiencies of the gluataraldehyde cross-linking used to conjugate each peptide to carrier protein are not amenable to quantitative comparison. Inoculation of chickens with alpha-peptides4a,4b,ent-4a, or alpha/beta-peptides5,6a,6b, or6dconjugated to bovine gamma-globulin with adjuvant stimulates production of peptide-specific responses ("anti-peptide" IgY antibodies). Association of antibody with immobilized peptide was evaluated only between an antibody and the peptide injected to stimulate production of that antibody. In all panels, the indicated peptides were conjugated to ovalbumin and were immobilized using a 1:100 dilution of the solution produced from the conjugation reaction. (a, b) Indirect ELISA analysis of IgY antibodies induced from injection of conjugated peptides4a-b, ent-4a, 5and6a-d. Thex-axis represents the dilution of the egg yolk used. "FCA" data points represent the binding of antibodies from chickens injected only with Freund's complete adjuvant (FCA) to the indicated immobilized peptide, which serve as negative controls. Panel a displays data generated from a single experiment, carried out separately from the single experiment performed to generate data in panel b. Data points in panels a and b represent mean +/- SD, with each condition run in duplicate. (c) Competitive ELISA analysis of peptides in solution (peptide competitor) inhibiting the binding of egg yolk derived-antibodies to immobilized peptides. IC50values were estimated manually as the concentration of peptide needed to eliminate approximately 50% of the signal (absorption at 405 nm) resulting from complex formation between IgY antibodies and immobilized peptide. All competition ELISA curves are presented inSupporting InformationFigure S4. It is noteworthy that haptenent-4a, composed entirely ofd-amino acid residues, stimulates production of a substantial titer of peptide-specific antibodies. Previous work indicated that an all-dprotein was nonimmunogenic,Nonebut our observations withent-4ashow thatd-polypeptides are inherently susceptible to antibody recognition, as would be expected based on physicochemical principles. A lack of T-cell help may underlie the earlier observationNonethatd-rubredoxin is not immunogenic. Since all sPLA2 fragment analogues used as haptens induced increased titers of peptide-specific antibodies, we sought to determine whether these antibodies were specific to the peptide used as hapten. We used competitive ELISA to test the ability of free peptides to disrupt binding of peptide-specific IgY antibodies in egg yolk to immobilized forms of the peptides used as haptens to induce antibody production. Cross-recognition was probed for all combinations of antibodies and sPLA2 fragment analogues. We estimated IC50values based on the concentration of soluble peptide needed to inhibit approximately half of the signal resulting from complexation of IgY with immobilized peptide (seeSupporting InformationFigure S4 for curves). IgY antibody-peptide interactions are categorized as strong, medium, weak, or nonbinding based on the approximate IC50value observed (Figure4c). These results show that for each antibody preparation, the soluble form of the peptide hapten is among the most potent inhibitors of complex formation with immobilized hapten, as expected. Substantial cross-reactivity is seen for alpha-peptides4aand4band the corresponding antibodies, as might be predicted given the high degree of similarity between these two alpha-peptide sequences (Cys vs Ser at position 6). Additionally, cross-reactivity is observed between alpha/beta-peptides5and6aand the corresponding antibodies. These peptides vary only in the identity of their N-terminal residues (threonine or beta3-homothreonine, respectively). Besides these two examples, instances of cross-reactivity are infrequent in this study, and the cross-reaction is weak when observed. These findings with an sPLA2 fragment and analogues are consistent with the recognition profiles discussed above for antibodies that bind to Bim BH3 analogues (alpha-peptide1and alpha/beta-peptides2and3a-d). Collectively, these two data sets, based on different peptide sequences, suggest trends that may ultimately prove to be general: antibodies raised against alpha-peptides tend to show little cross-reactivity toward alpha/beta-peptide homologues that contain beta3-residue densities and distributions commonly used for creating alpha-helix mimics,None-Noneand antibodies raised against such alpha/beta-peptides tend to show little-cross reactivity toward the homologous alpha-peptide. C57BL/6 mice that recover from an acute infection with lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV) contain memory CD8+T-cells that are specific for the viral epitope designated GP33, which corresponds to the peptide KAVYNFATM (7). NoneIsolation of splenocytes from such mice andex vivoexposure to alpha-peptide7leads to activation of these memory T-cells, which can be detected by production of the cytokine interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma). NoneThis activation presumably results from binding of the exogenously added peptide to MHC I on the surfaces of antigen-presenting cells (APCs), with subsequent recognition of these peptide + MHC I complexes by cognate TCRs on the memory CD8+T-cells. NoneThis cell-cell contact leads to formation of an immunological synapse and induction of T-cell receptor signaling and cytokine production. NoneWe used this system to ask whether an analogue of the 9-mer GP33 epitope containing two or three regularly spaced sites of alpha - greater than beta3replacement could recapitulate the role of the original alpha-peptide in T-cell activation. These experiments focused on five alpha/beta-peptide analogues of7, including one with the alphaalphabetaalphaalphaalphabeta pattern (8) and all four with the alphaalphaalphabeta pattern (9a-d) (Figure1). Flow cytometry was used to probe for a population of CD8+T-cells that produce IFN-gamma upon exposure to7or an alpha/beta analogue (Figure5). Such a population was readily detected when the splenocytes were exposed to alpha-peptide7, but not after exposure to any of the alpha/beta-peptides. Thus, although studies by other groups have shown that some T-cell epitope peptide analogues containing a single alpha - greater than beta3replacement can form MHC I complexes that are recognized by a cognate TCR,None-Noneour results indicate that peptide analogues containing a higher alpha - greater than beta3replacement density cannot mimic the role played by the alpha-peptide epitope GP33 in the GP33 + MHC I + TCR complex. alpha/beta-Peptide homologues of the GP33 peptide do not induce IFNgamma production in CD8+cells from LCMV-infected mice. (a) Representative flow cytometry dot plots examining IFNgamma production from CD8+splenocytes of LCMV-infected mice stimulated directly ex-vivo with the GP33 alpha-peptide (7) or alpha/beta homologues (8,9a-d) . Plots are gated from total CD8+lymphocyte populations. (b) Graphic representation of quantified flow cytometry data for IFNgamma production from panel a. Data represent mean +/- sd from three independent replicates. *p less than 0.05 vs medium using Mann-Whitneyttest. Our observations are consistent with two alternative hypotheses: (1) alpha/beta-peptides8and9a-ddo not bind to the MHC I that displays7, or (2) the alpha/beta-peptide+MHC I complexes form but are not recognized by the appropriate TCR. To distinguish between these two hypotheses we evaluated the binding of alpha-peptide7and alpha/beta-peptides8and9a-dto H2-DbMHC I using a competition-based assay. NoneThis MHC I subclass binds GP33 and is partially responsible for displaying the GP33 peptide epitopein vivoin C57BL/6 mice. NoneControl experiments confirmed that alpha-peptide7potently inhibits binding of a tracer peptide to purified H2-Db(IC50= 2.4 nM, Table1). alpha/beta-Peptides8and9a-dbind less tightly to H2-Dbthan does alpha-peptide7(Table1). The largest losses in affinity are seen in alpha/beta-peptides9band9d, which contain alpha - greater than beta replacements at "anchor" positions (positions 3, 5, and 9). Side chains from residues at these positions are known to form close contacts with H2-Db. Nonealpha/beta-Peptides that contain only alpha residues at anchor positions (8,9a, and9c) show stronger binding relative to alpha/beta-peptides9band9d, but alpha/beta-peptide8,9a, and9cnevertheless bind more weakly than does alpha-peptide7. Circular dichroism studies of alpha-peptide7and alpha/beta-peptides8and9a-dshow that none of these molecules adopt secondary structure in solution (Supporting InformationFigure S1), suggesting that alterations in secondary structural propensities are likely not responsible for the weakened binding of alpha/beta-GP33 analogues. Alternatively, the impaired binding of all alpha/beta-peptides tested relative to prototype alpha-peptide7may reflect subtle disruptions to energetically important contacts between peptide backbone atoms and H2-Dbcaused by the backbone alteration. Nonealpha/beta-Peptides8,9a, and9cwould be considered "H2-Dbbinders" by some criteria,None,Nonebut if they form MHC I complexes under our assay conditions, then the complexes do not productively engage cognate T-cell receptors, as indicated by the lack of IFN-gamma production. alpha/beta-Peptides8,9a, and9ccontain alpha - greater than beta replacements at positions within the GP33 epitope that would interact with a cognate TCR,Nonewhich may explain the lack of productive TCR engagement. IC50represents the concentration of peptide needed to inhibit 50% of tracer peptide binding as determined using previously developed methods. NoneAlthough analogues of a 9-mer GP33 epitope with two or three alpha - greater than beta replacements fail to stimulate IFN-gamma production in splenocytes from mice that have recovered from LCMV infection, these observations do not indicate whether alpha/beta-peptides can induce activation and proliferation of peptide-specific CD8+T-cells under other conditions. To probe this question we injected C57BL/6 mice lacking prior exposure to LCMV with either alpha-peptide7or alpha/beta-peptide8and analyzed splenocytes from these animals to look for populations of CD8+T-cells that produce IFN-gamma in response toex vivopeptide pulsation. Injection of mice with alpha-peptide7yields splenocytes that show a significant population of CD8+T-cells that produce IFN-gamma uponex vivopulsation with alpha-peptide7but not with alpha/beta-peptide8(Figure6). Similar experiments using splenocytes from mice injected with alpha/beta-peptide8reveal the absence of a significant population of CD8+T-cells that produce IFN-gamma in response to pulsation with alpha/beta-peptide8, which suggests that this alpha/beta-peptide is unable to stimulate expansion of peptide-specific CD8+T-cells in mice. alpha-Peptide7also fails to induce IFN-gamma production in splenocytes from mice injected with alpha/beta-peptide8, confirming that injection of alpha-peptide7was responsible for the increased frequency of CD8+T-cells that can be induced to produce IFN-gamma in response to ex vivo pulsation with7. Analogous studies in which Bim BH3-derived alpha-peptide1or alpha/beta-peptide2were injected into C57/BL6 mice showed that neither of these molecules induces expansion of peptide-specific CD8+T-cells (Supporting InformationFigure S5). The negative result from alpha-peptide1is consistent with the predicted weak affinityNoneof appropriately sized fragments from alpha-peptide1for H2-Kband H2-Db. alpha-Peptide7, but not alpha/beta-peptide8, stimulates the expansion of peptide-specific CD8+T-cells when injected in mice. These peptide-specific CD8+T-cells produce IFNgamma in response to alpha-peptide7, but not8, ex vivo. (a, b) Representative flow cytometry plots depicting the frequencies of IFNgamma responses of CD8+cells to ex vivo stimulation with7or8, respectively. Flow plots are gated from the total CD8+lymphocyte population. (c) Graphic representation of IFNgamma responses from splenocytes of mice injected with alpha-peptide7to exogenously administered GP33 analogues at indicated doses as assessed by flow cytometry. (d) Graphic representation of IFNgamma response of splenocytes from mice injected with alpha/beta-peptide8. Peptides were injected into three to four mice each, and splenocytes from these were pooled for experiments. Data represent mean +/- sd from three to four replicates. Medium represents the frequency of IFNgamma-positive CD8+T-cells observed with no peptide stimulation for that population of splenocytes. *p less than 0.05 vs medium using Mann-Whitneyttest. Oligomers that contain combinations of alpha- and beta-amino acid residues constitute an enormous pool of molecular diversity. Given the wide range of biological functions manifested by conventional peptides (l-alpha-amino acid residues only), one can anticipate that many alpha/beta-peptides will display useful and specific biological properties, some that mimic functions of natural polypeptides and others without natural precedent. As examples of biologically active alpha/beta-peptides multiply, it becomes increasingly important to understand how this type of unnatural oligomer is "perceived" by the immune system. The handful of previous relevant studies have focused almost exclusively on alpha/beta-peptides that contain just one beta residue; these precedents suggest that MHC-based and antibody-based recognition that developed to target a particular alpha-peptide is often retained for analogues containing a single alpha - greater than beta3or alpha - greater than aza-beta3replacement. None-NoneThe results reported here expand our understanding because we have considered alpha/beta-peptides containing multiple alpha - greater than beta3replacements, examples chosen to display beta3residue densities and distributions that enable functional mimicry of alpha-helical epitopes and strongly suppress proteolysis. None-NoneThe alpha/beta-peptides we have examined retain the side chain sequence of the alpha-peptide that inspired them, but the presence of multiple alpha - greater than beta3replacements is seen to block recognition by polyclonal antibodies that bind strongly to the parent alpha-peptide or to prevent participation in a TCR + MHC I + peptide complex that accommodates the parent alpha-peptide epitope. In addition, we show that antibodies can be raised against alpha/beta-peptide as haptens (i.e., conjugated to proteins that contain helper T-cell epitopes) but that these antibodies do not strongly cross-react with homologous alpha-peptides. Parallel experiments show that ad-alpha-peptide can serve as a hapten as well, but the resulting antibodies do not cross-react with the enantiomer (l-alpha-peptide). Our observations suggest that the immune system will not necessarily initiate unintended immune responses following exposure to alpha/beta-peptides. It is impossible for a single study to provide a comprehensive answer to the question, "how are alpha/beta-peptides 'perceived' by the immune system?" The results reported here suggest that immune receptors that recognize specific alpha-peptides are not necessarily cross-reactive with homologous alpha/beta-peptides. These observations encourage further exploration of oligomers with alphaalphaalphabeta or alphaalphabetaalphaalphaalphabeta backbones for biomedical applications; perhaps it will be possible to design alpha/beta-peptide immunogens that mimic specific alpha-helical epitopes. Further studies will be required to determine whether the conclusions drawn here, regarding a lack of cross-reactivity between homologous alpha- and alpha/beta-peptides, are general. Peptides were synthesized as C-terminal carboxylic acids with uncapped N-termini. Previously reported microwave-assisted solid-phase conditions were utilized. NoneDetailed methods for peptide synthesis are found in theSupporting Information. SeeSupporting InformationFigure S6 for sequences andSupporting InformationTable 1 for analytical HPLC retention times, purity data and a list of observed masses from MALDI-TOF-MS. SeeSupporting InformationFigure S7 for HPLC chromatograms and MALDI-TOF mass spectra. Assays were conducted using 96-well flat bottom Nunc Maxisorp plates. Peptides were prepared as DMSO stock solutions at a concentration of 10 mg mL-1and diluted in phosphate buffered saline containing 0.05% Tween-20 (PBST). Assay plates were coated with peptide via application of peptide solutions to assay wells for 2 h at room temperature (RT). Following peptide immobilization, and between each of the subsequent steps, assay plates were washed (4*) with PBST. Unoccupied sites on the surface of the assay plate were blocked via application of a solution of 1% bovine serum albumin (weight by volume) in PBST overnight at 4 degrees C. A solution containing a 1:200 dilution of anti-Bim BH3 polyclonal rabbit IgG 1 degrees antibody (Abgent, AP1308a) was applied to assay plates for 2 h at RT. A 1:2000 dilution of alkaline phosphatase-conjugated antirabbit-IgG 2 degrees antibody (Promega, S3731) was then applied for 2 h at RT. Following the final washing, Tris buffered solution containing p-nitrophenyl phosphate and magnesium chloride (Sigma-Aldrich, N1891) was added to enable evaluation of the extent of peptide-1 degrees antibody formation via quantification of p-nitrophenolate formation resulting from alkaline phosphatase-catalyzed hydrolysis. Plates were read by recording absorbance at 405 nm on a Synergy 2 plate reader (BioTek) 3 h after addition of p-nitrophenyl phosphate-containing buffer. Nunc Maxisorp assay plates were coated with aqueous solutions containing indicated peptides at varied concentrations for 2 h at RT. Subsequent steps of these ELISAs were run according to the protocol described above. Dose-response curves relating the magnitude of the absorption at 405 nm to peptide concentrations used in the assay plate coating step are found in Figure2. Nunc Maxisorp assay plates were coated with aqueous solutions of peptide1at a concentration of 44.3 muM for 2 h at RT. Assay plate washing and blocking steps were performed as described above. Prior to addition of the anti-Bim BH3 1 degrees antibody to the assay plate, the antibody-containing solution was mixed and incubated with varied concentrations of free (nonimmobilized) peptide in a separate 96 well plate for greater than 10 min. Following this incubation step, the 1 degrees antibody/peptide solution was added to the assay plate for 2 h. Subsequent steps in this assay were performed as described above. The sequence for mouse sPLA2-IB (sPLA2) was sourced from pubmed.gov protein: NP_035237.1 and was based on sequence analysis from ref (41). One milligram of each peptide (Bim BH3 or sPLA2) was conjugated to one milligram bovine gamma globulin (BGG) (Sigma-Aldrich, G5009) or ovalbumin (OVA) (Sigma-Aldrich, A5503) using gluataraldehyde (8 mM) in sodium acetate buffer (100 mM, pH 7.0). Excess glutaraldehyde was quenched through addition of glycine and peptide-carrier protein conjugates were then dialyzed against phosphate buffered saline overnight in 12 000-14 000 molecular weight dialysis membrane tubing (Fisher Scientific, 21-152-8). Conjugates were then dispensed in aliquots and frozen at -80 degrees C until ready for injection into the laying hens or ELISA. All procedures involving chickens were approved by the University of Wisconsin, College of Agricultural and Life Sciences Animal Care and Use Committee. Single comb white leghorn laying hens were subcutaneously injected (500 mug peptide/chicken) with sPLA2-BGG or Bim BH3-BGG peptide conjugates emulsified with Freund's Complete Adjuvant (Fisher Scientific, PI-77140). Control antibodies were taken from chickens injected with adjuvant only. Chickens were given a single booster injection with each peptide (500 mug peptide/chicken) 1 week after the initial injection with the peptide conjugate emulsified in Freund's Incomplete Adjuvant (Fisher Scientific, PI-77145). Eggs were collected beginning 2 weeks after the initial injection. Egg yolks from each peptide were physically separated from albumin, combined, lyophilized, and stored at RT until needed. Enzyme linked immunosorbant assays (ELISAs) were then used to determine the titer of the antibody. Assays were conducted using 96-well flat bottom Nunc Maxisorp plates. Assay plates were coated with 1:100 dilutions of previously prepared peptide-OVA conjugates in PBS via application of peptide solutions to assay wells overnight at 4 degrees C. Following peptide immobilization, and between each of the subsequent steps, assay plates were washed (4*) with PBST. Unoccupied sites on the surface of the assay plate were blocked via application of a solution of 1% bovine serum albumin (weight by volume) for 1 h. Egg yolk or lyophilized egg powder was first diluted 1:10 in acidified PBS (pH = 5) and centrifuged before further dilutions in PBS and addition to the assay plate. A 1:1000 dilution of alkaline phosphatase-conjugated antichicken-IgG 2 degrees antibody (Sigma-Aldrich, A9171) was then applied for 1 h at RT. Following the final washing, Tris buffered solution containing p-nitrophenyl phosphate and magnesium chloride was added to enable evaluation of the extent of peptide-1 degrees antibody formation via quantification of p-nitrophenolate formation resulting from alkaline phosphatase-catalyzed hydrolysis. Development of color in experiment wells was halted by addition of 1 N NaOH after color development progressed sufficiently to be easily observed by eye (5-60 min). Plates were read by recording absorbance at 405 nm on a Synergy 2 plate reader (BioTek). ELISAs were run according to the protocol described above. During the primary antibody incubation step, serial dilutions of the egg primary antibody were then prepared in PBS in a separate polypropylene dilution plate (Costar EW-01728-80) before application to the assay plate. Subsequent steps in this assay were performed as described above. ELISAs were run according to the protocol described above. Prior to addition of the 1 degrees egg antibody to the assay plate, antibody-containing solution was mixed and incubated with varied concentrations of free (nonimmobilized) peptide in a separate 96 well plate for greater than 10 min. Free peptides were prepared as DMSO stock solutions at a concentration of 10 mg mL-1and diluted in PBS. Subsequent steps in this assay were performed as described above. C57/BL6 mice between the ages of 6 and 8 weeks were infected with 2 * 105plaque forming units of lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV) Armstrong strain by intraperitoneal (IP) injection. After 30 days, when a competent memory CD8+T cell population is established, mice were sacrificed, and single cell suspensions of splenocytes were prepared, as described previously. NoneAll animal experiments were performed in accordance with protocols approved by the University of Wisconsin School of Veterinary Medicine Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC). C57/BL6 mice between the ages of 6 and 8 weeks were injected subcutaneously with 50 mug of peptide [GP33 (7), alpha/beta-GP33 (8), Bim BH3 (1), or alpha/beta-Bim BH3 (2)] emulsified in Freund's incomplete adjuvant (3 to 4 mice per peptide). After 30 days, mice were sacrificed and single cell suspensions of splenocytes were prepared, as described previously. NoneSplenocytes from animals in each injection group were pooled for flow cytometry analysis. All animal experiments were performed in accordance with protocols approved by the University of Wisconsin School of Veterinary Medicine Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC). To quantify intracellular cytokine production, 1 * 106splenocytes were stimulated for 5 h at 37 degrees C in a 96 well microtiter plate with alpha-GP33, alpha-Bim BH3, alpha/beta-GP33 or alpha/beta-Bim BH3 peptide analogues in the presence of Brefeldin A. NoneFollowing stimulation, cells were incubated with antibody for the surface marker CD8 (BD Biosciences). Next, cells were permeabilized and fixed using the Cytofix/Cytoperm kit (BD Biosciences) and subsequently stained for the intracellular cytokine IFNgamma using the Cytofix/Cytoperm kit (BD Biosciences, Franklin Lakes, NJ). Cells were fixed with 2% paraformaldehyde in PBS, and data were acquired on a FACSCalibur flow cytometer. Data were analyzed using FlowJo analysis software (Treestar), and the frequency of IFNgamma -producing CD8+T cells was determined. Purification of H2-Dbclass I MHC molecules by affinity chromatography, and performance of assays to quantitatively measure peptide affinity based on the inhibition of binding of a high affinity radiolabeled peptide to purified MHC molecules, has been detailed elsewhere. NoneUnder the conditions utilized, where [label] less than [MHC] and IC50 greater than = [MHC], the measured IC50values are reasonable approximations of the trueKdvalues. None,NoneEach competitor peptide was tested at six different concentrations covering a 100 000-fold dose range and in three or more independent experiments. As a positive control, the unlabeled version of the radiolabeled probe was also tested in each experiment. An Aviv 420 Circular Dichroism Spectrophotometer was used to acquire all CD data. Wavelength scans were acquired at 20 degrees C at a step value of 1 nm and an averaging time of 3.0 s from 260 to 200 nm. A 0.1 mm cell was used for all spectra. All samples were prepared at a peptide concentration of 50 muM in 10 mM sodium phosphate buffer, pH 7.0. Peptide concentrations were calculated by measuring absorption at 280 nm after dissolving lyophilized peptide samples in sodium phosphate buffer (assuming epsilon(Trp)= 5690 M-1cm-1and epsilon(Tyr)= 1280 M-1cm-1at 280 nm). Data were processed by using the Microsoft Excel and GraphPad Prism 4.0 software packages. Graphical representations of ELISA data depict experimental means +/- standard deviations, with each condition run in duplicate. Graphical representations of flow cytometry data depict experimental means +/- standard deviations, with each condition run in triplicate or quadruplicate. Mann-Whitney tests were used to generate p-values in flow cytometry experiments.