Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) occurs approximately 3% of all malignancies in the US (1). Oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC), which contributes to 40% of all HNSCC, is associated with mucosal surfaces of the oral cavity and oropharynx (2). The etiology of OSCC involves multiple genetic alterations and an exposure to environmental carcinogens such as tobacco, alcohol, chronic inflammation and viral infections (3). OSCC tumor cells have been shown to invade maxillary and mandibular bone in a murine model (4). Nuclear factor kappaB (NF-kappaB) expression is upregulated in OSCC gradually from premalignant lesions to invasive cancer (5). Hepatocyte growth factor through upregulation of matrix metalloproteinases such as MMP-1 and MMP-9 promotes OSCC tumor invasion (6). Thus, malignant OSCC tumors potently invade local bone; however the molecular mechanisms of tumor-associated osteolysis of bone are unclear. The tumor necrosis factor (TNF) family member, receptor activator of NF-kappaB ligand (RANKL) which is expressed on marrow stromal/preosteoblast cells in response to several osteotropic factors, is critical for osteoclast precursor differentiation to form multinucleated osteoclasts which resorb bone (7). Osteoclast activation plays an important role in several malignancies including oral cancer invasion of bone and metastasis (8). Also, MMP-7 produced by osteoclasts at the prostate tumor-bone interface has been shown to promote osteolysis through solubilization of RANKL (9). Furthermore, altered RANKL and osteoprotegerin (OPG) expression in OSCC cells facilitate osteoclastogenesis at the tumor-bone microenvironment (10). Thus, RANKL expression in the tumor-bone microenvironment plays an important role in cancer invasion of bone. Chemokines are a superfamily of small cytokine-like proteins that interact with seven-transmembrane-domain glycoprotein receptors coupled to the G protein signaling pathway which selectively attract and activate different cell types (11). CXC chemokines represent a subfamily with first two of four invariant cysteine residues separated by a single amino acid and play an important role in regulation of angiogenesis, tumor immunity and organ specific metastasis (12,13). CXC chemokine ligand-13 (CXCL13) which binds monogamously to the CXC chemokine receptor-5 (CXCR5) is involved in B-cell chemotaxis and is induced under inflammatory conditions (14). It has been shown that inflammatory cytokines such as interleukin (IL)-1beta and TNF-alpha differentially modulate CXCL13 production in stromal and osteoblast cells derived from osteoarthritis patients (15). Similarly, IL-6 treatment significantly induced CXCL13 expression in human bone marrow endothelial cells and osteoblast cells, but not osteoclasts (16). Furthermore, HNSCC has been reported to predominantly express chemokine receptors such as CCR7 and CXCR5; however, CXCR4 expression is low or undetectable (17). Microarray analysis for gene expression profiling in OSCC identified high levels of CXCL13 expression, which is implicated in OSCC development and progression (18,19). Recently, we showed nuclear factor of activated T-cells, cytoplasmic 3 (NFATc3) is a downstream target of the CXCL13 signaling axis to stimulate RANKL expression in OSCC cells (20). Here, we report that CXCL13 activation of c-Myc induce RANKL expression in stromal/preosteoblast cells, which implicate CXCL13 as a potential therapeutic target to prevent OSCC invasion of bone/osteolysis. We recently identified high levels of CXCL13 secretion in OSCC derived cell lines and further demonstrated a functional role in tumor invasion of bone/osteolysis in athymic mice (21). In this study, immunohistochemical staining using a tissue microarray (TMA) of sixty human OSCC tumors specimens identified greater than 95% of OSCC stained strong positive for CXCL13 expression; however a very low level expression was detected in normal adjacent tissue (Fig. 1A). We next measured the levels of CXCL13 in conditioned media (CM) obtained from the human bone marrow derived stromal cell line (SAKA-T) (22) and murine preosteoblast (MC3T3-E1) cells compared to OSCC tumor derived cell line (SCC-14a) by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). We demonstrated SAKA-T and MC3T3-E1 cells produced very low levels (10 pg/ml) of CXCL13 compared to SCC-14a CM (120 pg/ml) (Fig. 1B). We then examined whether CXCL13 stimulates the CXCL13 specific receptor, CXCR5 expression in bone marrow stromal/preosteoblast cells. Western blot analysis of total cell lysates obtained from SAKA-T and MC3T3-E1 cells stimulated with CXCL13 (15 ng/ml) indicated a time-dependent increase in CXCR5 expression (Fig. 1C). These results suggest that OSCC secretion of CXCL13 at high levels modulates CXCR5 expression in stromal/preosteoblast cells. Previously we showed CXCL13 stimulation of RANKL, a critical osteoclastogenic factor expression in OSCC cells (20). We therefore examined the potential of OSCC CM to stimulate RANKL expression in bone marrow derived stromal/preosteoblast cells. Real-time reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis of total RNA isolated from MC3T3-E1 preosteoblast cells stimulated with CM (0-30%) obtained from OSCC cell lines (SCC-1, SCC-11B and SCC-14a) demonstrated a dose-dependent increase in RANKL mRNA expression. We further demonstrated that anti-CXCR5 antibody abolished SCC-14a CM (20%) and recombinant CXCL13 (15 ng/ml) induced RANKL expression in SAKA-T and MC3T3-E1 cells (Fig. 2A). In addition, cells stimulated with different concentrations (0-15 ng/ml) of CXCL13 revealed a dose-dependent increase in RANKL mRNA expression (Fig. 2B). Western blot analysis of total cell lysates obtained from SAKA-T, MC3T3-E1 and primary mouse bone marrow derived stromal cells further confirmed CXCL13 stimulation of RANKL expression (Fig. 2C). These results indicate that OSCC secretion of CXCL13 stimulates RANKL expression in stromal/preosteoblast cells. To determine the CXCL13 transcriptional control of RANKL expression, SAKA-T and MC3T3-E1 cells were transiently transfected with hRANKL-luciferase reporter plasmid (hRANKL P#3) by lipofectamine and treated with CXCL13 (0-15 ng/ml) for 6 h. Cells mock-transfected with the empty vector (EV) served as controls. CXCL13 treatment dose-dependently increased the hRANKL gene promoter activity in SAKA-T and MC3T3-E1 cells (Fig. 3A B). To further examine the CXCL13 transcriptional control of RANKL gene expression, we performed SuperArray screening for transcription factors. SAKA-T cells were stimulated with CXCL13 (15 ng/ml) for 6 h and total RNA isolated was used as template for SuperArray screening with real-time RT-PCR and data obtained were analyzed by a web portal as described in methods. We thus identified CXCL13 upregulation of c-Myc (4-fold) and NFATc3 (4.5-fold) transcription factors which have consensus binding motifs in the hRANKL promoter region (23) (data not shown). To further validate these results, total cell lysates obtained from MC3T3-E1 cells stimulated with different concentrations of CXCL13 (0-20 ng/ml) for 6 h were analyzed by Western blot. CXCL13 treatment resulted in a dose-dependent increase in c-Myc, NFATc3 and RANKL expression in these cells (Fig. 3C). We next examined the status of CXCL13 induced c-Myc activation in SAKA-T and MC3T3-E1 cells. As shown inFig. 3D, cells stimulated with CXCL13 (15 ng/ml) for a variable period (0-60 min) had a significant increase in phospho-c-Myc (p-c-Myc) expression. Taken together, these data indicate that CXCL13 induction of c-Myc and NFATc3 transcription factors may upregulate RANKL gene expression in stromal/preosteoblast cells. To determine the involvement of c-Myc and NFATc3 in OSCC tumor-bone microenvironment in vivo, we developed OSCC cells (SCC-11B) stably transfected with hRANKL-luciferase construct and injected (7*106cells in PBS) subcutaneously onto the surface of calvaria in NCr-nu/nu athymic mice. Tumors appeared by day seven and thereafter continued to grow for five weeks period. Mice received D-luciferin (150 mg/kg, i.p) at weekly interval and bioluminescence signals were monitored as described in methods. OSCC tumors developed on calvaria demonstrated an increase in luciferase activity with tumor progression (Fig. 4A). Immunohistochemical analysis of OSCC tumors developed over calvaria in athymic mice demonstrated RANKL and NFATc3 expression in both tumor and osteoblast cells present at the tumor-bone interface. In contrast, p-c-Myc expression was detected only in osteoblastic cells. The osteoblastic cells in the tumor-bone interface were stained positive for alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity (Fig. 4B). We then analyzed NFATc3 expression and c-Myc activation in primary human OSCC tumor specimens compared to normal adjacent tissue. Interestingly, immunohistochemical staining of human OSCC tumor specimens identified NFATc3 but not p-c-Myc expression. Furthermore, NFATc3 and p-c-Myc expression was not detected in normal adjacent tissue (Fig. 4C). These results suggest that c-Myc activation play an important role to modulate RANKL expression in stromal/preosteoblast cells in the OSCC tumor-bone microenvironment. Since c-Myc activation is specific to stromal/preosteoblast cells in the tumor-bone microenvironment, we next delineated the functional role of c-Myc in CXCL13 stimulation of RANKL expression in these cells. To assess the CXCL13-CXCR5 signaling axis operative in stromal/preosteoblast cells, SAKA-T and MC3T3-E1 cells were stimulated with CXCL13 (15 ng/ml) for a variable period (0-60 min). Total cell lysates obtained were subjected to Western blot analysis to measure phospho-ERK1/2 (p-ERK1/2). As shown inFig. 5A, CXCL13 stimulation significantly induced pERK1/2 expression in these cells in a time-dependent manner. Further, MC3T3-E1 cells were transfected with siRNA against NFATc3 or c-Myc by oligofectamine and stimulated with CXCL13 (15 ng/ml) for 48 h. Non-specific siRNA transfected cells served as control. Total cell lysates obtained were subjected to Western blot analysis for RANKL expression. MC3T3-E1 cells knock-down of NFATc3 demonstrated a significant decrease in RANKL; however no change in c-Myc expression (Fig. 5B). In contrast, MC3T3-E1 cells knock-down of c-Myc showed inhibition of both RANKL and NFATc3 expression (Fig. 5C). These results suggest that CXCL13 induced c-Myc expression is critical for NFATc3 regulation of RANKL expression in stromal/preosteoblast cells. Because CXCL13 enhanced p-c-Myc expression in stromal/preosteoblast cells, we next examined the potential of CXCL13 induced p-c-Myc nuclear translocation in preosteoblast cells. MC3T3-E1 cells were stimulated with CXCL13 (15 ng/ml) for 6 h and immune stained with anti-p-c-Myc antibody. Confocal microscopy revealed that CXCL13 treatment induced nuclear translocation of p-c-Myc in these cells (Fig. 6A). We further analyzed c-Myc binding to the hRANKL gene promoter element via chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay. SAKA-T cells stimulated with CXCL13 were analyzed by ChIP using anti-p-c-Myc antibody as described in methods. PCR analysis of chromatin immune complexes was then performed with hRANKL gene promoter specific primers. We identified that CXCL13 treatment significantly increased p-c-Myc binding to the RANKL promoter region. A low level of p-c-Myc binding in unstimulated cells could be due to basal level expression of CXCL13 produced by these cells (Fig. 6B C). Collectively, these results suggest that CXCL13 activation of c-Myc induces RANKL expression in bone marrow stromal/preosteoblast cells. RANKL-RANK signaling is critical for osteoclast development and bone resorption activity (7). RANKL has been implicated as prognostic marker and therapeutic target for cancer metastasis (24-26). Also, CXCL13 has been identified as a prognostic marker in OSCC development (19). We demonstrated CXCL13 expression in primary human OSCC tumor specimens consistent with microarray profiling of gene expression in OSCC (18). In contrast to OSCC cells, stromal/preosteoblast cells produced low levels of CXCL13. However, human osteoblasts have been shown to express functional CXCR5 receptors (27). Our findings that OSCC production of CXCL13 which induces CXCR5 expression suggest a paracrine regulation in these cells. Furthermore, CXCL13 stimulation of RANKL expression in stromal/preosteoblast cells facilitates osteoclast activation and tumor invasion of bone/osteolysis. We recently identified elevated osteoclast formation/activity at OSCC tumor-bone microenvironment in athymic mice (21). CXCL13 has been shown to be involved in prostate cancer progression and invasion through extracellular signal-regulated kinases (ERK) activation (28). Further, lipopolysaccharide treatment of osteoblasts induced RANKL expression in an ERK activation dependent manner (29). In addition, ERK signaling has been shown to promote c-Myc expression and activity in rhabdomyosarcoma tumor cells (30). Therefore, CXCL13 activation of ERK1/2 may play an important role in c-Myc and RANKL expression in stromal/preosteoblast cells. Tumor derived cytokines such as parathyroid hormone (PTH), IL-1beta and prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) have been shown to up regulate RANKL expression in bone marrow stromal/osteoblast cells (31-33). Furthermore, OSCC production of osteotropic cytokines and stimulation of stromal cells to synthesize IL-6 in the tumor-bone microenvironment favors osteoclast formation/activation (34). Therefore, it is possible that OSCC production of osteotropic cytokines regulate RANKL expression independent of the CXCL13-CXCR5 signaling axis in stromal/preosteoblast cells. However, CXCL13 up regulation of hRANKL promoter activity in stromal/preosteoblast cells indicate CXCL13-CXCR5 signaling axis transcriptionally modulate RANKL expression in these cells. Our results that superarray screening identified CXCL13 upregulation of c-Myc and NFATc3 which has consensus binding motifs in the hRANKL promoter region and ChIP assay demonstrated p-c-Myc binding to the hRANKL promoter region further confirms the CXCL13 transcriptional control of RANKL expression. It has been demonstrated that increased RANKL expression in stromal cells results in excess bone resorption in multiple myeloma (35). Also, RANKL expression in fibroblastic cells in human gingival squamous cell carcinomas is implicated in bone invasion (36). In addition, prostate tumor cells and osteoclast production of MMP-7 has been shown to contribute to tumor induced osteolysis through solubilization of RANKL in the tumor-bone microenvironment (37). Similarly, tumor cell interaction with osteoclasts results in up regulation of cathepsin G expression which promotes tumor osteolysis through solubilization of RANKL (38). Therefore, OSCC production of matrix metalloproteases may increase soluble RANKL which promote tumor invasion of bone. This study further identify that CXCL13 induces c-Myc and NFATc3 expression in stromal/preosteoblast cells; however, c-Myc activation is specific in preosteoblast cells at the tumor-bone interface. Variable levels of c-Myc expression has been reported in OSCC tumors at different stages (39). In this study, we observe lack of c-Myc activation in primary OSCC specimens from human subjects and mouse xenograft model. NFATc1 regulate c-Myc gene transcription in pancreatic cancer cells (40). Conversely, c-Myc expression has been shown to increase intracellular calcium levels and NFAT activation in B lymphocytes (41). Also, sequential induction of NFAT and c-Myc by TGF-beta promote cancer cell proliferation (42). In this study, we show that siRNA suppression of c-Myc inhibits CXCL13 induced NFATc3 and RANKL expression indicates that c-Myc activation is critical for RANKL expression in stromal/preosteoblast cells. Thus, our findings are novel that CXCL13 production by OSCC cells stimulates RANKL expression in bone marrow stromal/preosteoblast cells and c-Myc is a downstream target of the CXCL13/CXCR5 axis to stimulate RANKL expression. Collectively, our studies implicate CXCL13 as a potential therapeutic target to prevent OSCC invasion of bone/osteolysis. Cell culture and DNA transfection reagents were purchased from Invitrogen (Carlsbad, CA). E.coli derived recombinant human CXCL13 (purity greater than 95%), anti-CXCR5, anti-human RANKL antibodies and CXCL13 ELISA kits were purchased from R D systems Inc (Minneapolis, MN). Anti- NFATc3, anti-c-Myc, anti-ERK, anti-p-ERK, peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibodies and siRNA against NFATc3 and c-Myc were purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology, CA. Anti-p-c-Myc was purchased from Cell Signaling Technology Inc (Danvers, MA). Super signal-enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL) system (Pierce, Rockford, IL) and PVDF membranes were purchased from Millipore (Bedford, MA). A luciferase reporter assay system was obtained from Promega (Madison, WI) and protease inhibitor cocktail was purchased from Sigma (St. Louis, MO). Human OSCC tumor-derived SCC-1, SCC-11B and SCC-14a cell lines (43) were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum and 100 units/ml penicillin/streptomycin in a humidified atmosphere with 5% CO2at 37 degrees C. In sub-confluent state, cells were washed twice with PBS and once with serum-free DMEM, and subsequently cultured in serum-free DMEM for 24 h. The conditioned media (CM) collected was centrifuged to eliminate intact cells, debris and stored at -80 degrees C for further use. SCC-11B cells (7*106) stably transfected with RANKL-luciferase construct were injected subcutaneously (n=10) in phosphate buffered saline (PBS) overlaying the calvaria of NCr-nu/nu athymic mice, aged 4 to 6 weeks (NCI, Frederick, MD) and PBS alone injected were served as control group (n=8). At the end of experimental period, mice received D-luciferin (150 mg/kg, i.p) under 1-2% inhaled isoflurane anesthesia. The bioluminescence signals were monitored using the IVIS system 200 series consisting of a highly sensitive cooled CCD camera and Living Image software (Xenogen Corp., USA) was used to grid the imaging data and integrates the total bioluminescence signals in each boxed region. Two kinetic bioluminescent acquisitions were collected between 0 and 20 min after D-luciferin injection to confirm the peak photon emission recorded as maximum photon efflux per second. All fluorescence images were acquired with a 15 s exposure. Data were analyzed using the total photon flux emission (photons/second) in the regions of interest covering the entire calvarial region. All the animal procedures were performed following the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) approved protocol. CXCL13 levels in serum free conditioned media (CM) from SCC-14a, human bone marrow derived stromal cell line (SAKA-T) and mouse preosteoblast cell line (MC3T3-E1) was measured using the human and mouse specific ELISA kits (R D systems, Minneapolis, MO) following the manufacturer's protocol. Tissue microarray (TMA) of sixty primary human OSCC tumors specimens were obtained from the Head and Neck Cancer Tissue Array Initiative at the NIDCR, NIH (44) and eight control adjacent normal tissues were obtained from the Hollings Cancer Center Tissue Biorepository in accordance with an Institutional Review Board (IRB) approved protocol. Formalin-fixed OSCC tumor specimens from athymic mice or human subjects were processed for paraffin sectioning. Serial 5-mum sections were cut on a modified Leica RM 2155 rotary microtome (Leica Microsystems, Ontario, Canada). Antigen retrieval was performed with Target Retrieval Solution (DAKO, Carpinteria, CA) coupled with steaming. The slides were incubated with primary anti-CXCL13, anti-NFATc3, anti-RANKL and anti-p-c-Myc antibodies for 60 min at room temperature. Immunohistochemical staining was performed with HRP labeled secondary antibody and DAB (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA). The slides were briefly counterstained with hematoxylin, and dehydrated through graded alcohols to xylene and were cover slipped with a permanent mounting media. RANKL mRNA expression levels were measured by real-time RT-PCR as described earlier (20). Briefly, total RNA was isolated from SAKA-T and MC3T3-E1 cells treated with/without different concentrations of conditioned media (0-30%) obtained from OSCC cell lines or recombinant CXCL13 (0-15 ng/ml) for 6 h using RNAzol reagent (Biotecx Labs, Houston, TX). To eliminate the residual genomic DNA contamination, total RNA was treated with DNAse I (Sigma) at room temperature for 15 min followed by 10 min at 65 degrees C with the addition of 25 mM EDTA. The RNA integrity of samples was evaluated based on the intensity of 28S and 18S rRNA bands on agarose gels andA260/A280ratio between 1.8 and 2.0. The reverse transcription reaction was performed using poly-dT primer and Moloney murine leukemia virus reverse transcriptase (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) in a 25 mul reaction volume containing total RNA (2 mug), 1* PCR buffer and 2 mM MgCl2, at 42 degrees C for 15 min followed by 95 degrees C for 5 min. The quantitative real-time RT-PCR was performed using IQTMSYBR Green Supermix in an iCycler (iCycler iQ Single-color real-time-PCR detection system; Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA). The primer sequences used to amplify human glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (hGAPDH) mRNA were 5'-CCTACCCCCAATGTATCCGTTGTG-3 (sense) and 5'-GGAGGAATGGGAGTTGCTGTTGAA-3' (anti-sense); hRANKL mRNA 5'-ACCAGCATCAAAATCCCAAG-3' (sense) and 5'-TAAGGAGTTGGAGACCT-3' (anti-sense). The primers to amplify mGAPDH mRNA were 5'-ACC ACA GTC CAT GCC ATC AC -3 (sense) and 5'-TCC ACC ACC CTG TTG CTG TA-3' (anti-sense); mRANKL mRNA 5'-CAG CCA TTT GCA CAC CTC ACC ATC-3' (sense) and 5'-TTT CGT GCT CCC TCC TTT CAT CAG-3' (anti-sense). Thermal cycling parameters were 94 degrees C for 3 min, followed by 35 cycles of amplifications at 94 degrees C for 30 s, 60 degrees C for 1 min, 72 degrees C for 2 min, and 72 degrees C for 10 min as the final elongation step. The melt curve analysis was performed from 59-95 degrees C with 0.5 degrees C increments. The specificities of PCR amplifications were assessed from the melt curves to confirm the presence of gene specific peaks. Relative levels of mRNA expression were normalized in all the samples analyzed with respect to the levels of GAPDH amplification. SAKA-T cells were cultured in alpha-MEM and MC3T3-E1 cells were cultured in alpha-MEM containing ribonucleosides and deoxyribonucleosides without ascorbic acid. The media were supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 100 units/ml penicillin/streptomycin and cells were cultured in a humidified atmosphere with 5% CO2at 37 degrees C. hRANKL promoter-luciferase reporter plasmid (hRANKL P#3) construct (23) was transiently transfected into SAKA-T and MC3T3-E1 cells using lipofectamine. The transfection efficiency was normalized by co-transfection with 0.2 mug of pRSV beta-gal plasmid and beta-galactosidase activity was measured in the cells (Promega, Madison, WI). LacZ cytochemical activity staining (Invitrogen, Inc., San Diego, CA) indicated the DNA transfection efficiency greater than 80% in these cells. Cells were stimulated withE. coliexpressed recombinant hCXCL13 (0-15 ng/ml) for 6 h. Cell monolayer was washed twice with phosphate buffered saline and incubated at room temperature for 15 min with 0.3 ml cell lysis reagent. A 20 mul aliquot of each sample was mixed with 100 mul of the luciferase assay reagent. The light emission was measured for 10 s of integrated time using a Sirius Luminometer following the manufacturer's instructions (Promega, Madison, WI)SAKA-T and MC3T3-E1 cells were seeded (5*105cells/well) in 6-well plates and supplemented with alpha-MEM containing 10% FBS. Cells were stimulated with or without CXCL13 as indicated and total cell lysates were prepared in a buffer containing 20 mM Tris-HCl at pH 7.4, 1% Triton X-100, 1 mM EDTA, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 10% glycerol, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1 mM Na3VO4and 1* protease inhibitor cocktail. The protein content of the samples was measured using the BCA protein assay reagent (Pierce, Rockford, IL). Protein (100 mug) samples were then subjected to SDS-PAGE using 4-15% Tris-HCl gels and blot transferred on to a PVDF membrane and immunoblotted with anti-CXCR5, anti-RANKL, anti-c-Myc, anti-p-c-Myc, anti-NFATc3 and anti-ERK/p-ERK antibodies. The bands were detected using the enhanced chemiluminescence detection system. The band intensity was quantified by densitometric analysis using the NIH ImageJ Program. SAKA-T cells (5*106cells/well) were cultured in a 60 mm tissue culture plate with or without CXCL13 (15 ng/ml) for 6 h and total RNA was isolated using RNAzol reagent. Reverse transcription reaction was performed as described earlier. Real-time PCR was performed using 2x SuperArray RT qPCR Master Mix (RT2ProfilerTMPCR Array System (SuperArray PAHS-075A-02) in a 96-well plate to quantify expression levels of 84 transcription factors. Thermal cycling parameters were 95 degrees C for 10 min, followed by 40 cycles of amplifications at 95 degrees C for 15 s, 55 degrees C for 30 s, 72 degrees C for 30 s, and 72 degrees C for 5 min as the final elongation step. Relative mRNA expression was normalized in all samples with housekeeping gene expression, and data analysis was performed using the web portal (www.superarray.com/pcrarraydataanalysis.php). MC3T3-E1 cells were cultured (1*103/well) in a Lab-Tek 4-well chamber slides (Nunc Inc, Rochester, NY). Cells were stimulated with and without CXCL13 (15 ng/ml) for 6 h and fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS for 10 min at room temperature. Cells were permeabilized with 0.1% Triton X-100 for 10 min and blocked for 1 h with PBS containing 2% horse serum at room temperature. Cells were incubated with rabbit anti-p-c-Myc (10 mug/ml) antibody for 3 h and treated with Alexa 488-conjugated anti-rabbit IgG in PBS containing 2% horse serum for 1 h at room temperature. The nuclear staining was performed with DRAQ5 and cellular localization of p-c-Myc was visualized by confocal microscopy (LSM 510; Carl Zeiss, Inc., Thornwood, NY). ChIP was performed using the ChIP Assay Kit (Upstate, Temecula, CA) following the manufacturer's instructions. Briefly, human bone marrow derived stromal cells (SAKA-T) were stimulated with and without CXCL13 (15 ng/ml) for 6 h. Cells were cross-linked with 1% formaldehyde for 10 min. Soluble chromatin was prepared by sonication using the Branson-250 digital sonifier (Branson Ultrasonics, Danbury, CT) to an average DNA length of 200-1,000 bp. Approximately 5*105cell equivalent (1/6th) of the sheared soluble chromatin was precleared with blocked Protein G agarose, and 10% of the precleared chromatin was set aside as input control. Immunoprecipitation was carried out with anti-p-c-Myc antibody (5 mug) or equivalent concentrations of rabbit IgG as negative control overnight at 4 degrees C. Immune complexes were pulled down using Protein G agarose, washed and eluted twice with 250 mul of elution buffer (0.1 M NaHCO3, 1% SDS) and cross-linking reversed in 200 mM NaCl at 65 degrees C overnight with 20 mug RNase A. DNA was purified following proteinase K treatment with the Qiagen PCR purification kit (Qiagen, MD). To analyze the p-c-Myc binding to the hRANKL gene promoter region, the immunoprecipitated chromatin DNA samples were subjected to PCR analysis using primer pairs to amplify c-Myc binding region (-1393 bp to -1388 bp) in the hRANKL promoter (23): 5'-ATT TAG AAC ACA TGC TTT AAT A-3' (sense) and 5'-TGC CTA ATT CGC TAA TGA GTA TTT C-3' (anti-sense). Thermal cycling parameters of a 20 mul reaction mixture were 94 degrees C for 30 s, followed by 35 cycles of amplifications at 94 degrees C for 30 s, 55 degrees C for 30 s, 72 degrees C for 30 s, and 72 degrees C for 5 min as the final elongation step. PCR products were electrophoresed on 2% agarose gels and visualized by ethidium bromide. MC3T3-E1 cells were seeded (5*105cells/well) in 6-well plates and supplemented with alpha-MEM containing 10% FBS. One day after seeding, cells were transfected with double-stranded siRNA (20 nM) against NFATc3 or c-Myc by oligofectamine for 48 h. Non-specific siRNA transfected cells served as control. Cells were cultured in the presence and absence of CXCL13 (15 ng/ml) for 6 h. Total cell lysates obtained were analyzed by Western blot for RANKL, c-Myc and NFATc3 expression using specific antibodies. Results are presented as mean +/- SD for three independent experiments and compared by Student 't'-test. Values were considered significant at *p less than 0.05.