Dynamic Covalent Bonding (DCB) can be used to exchange molecular components to reach the thermodynamic minima of a system. None-NoneIn recent decades, DCB has been explored due to applicability in supramolecular chemistry. None-NoneFor example, DCB is useful in creating new molecular receptors, protein ligands and sensors. None-NoneIt is quite common to combine metal-coordination or donor-acceptor interactions with dynamic covalent bonds. None,NoneOne application to which DCB has been applied is the determination of chirality. The discrimination of chiral compounds is essential in the pharmaceutical industry where enantiomeric purity of chiral drugs can greatly influence therapeutic and biological properties. NoneMuch effort has been devoted to creating methods that report the enantiomeric excess (ee) of target chiral building blocks using supramolecular and dynamic covalent bond chemistry. None-NoneOur group reported a one-pot protocol involving multiple dynamic covalent bonds which target chiral alcohols. NoneThis system forms a hemi-aminal (1) from three components, which subsequently forms a hemi-aminal ether (3) from a fourth component (alcohol) upon dehydration (Scheme 1). The reversibility of the covalent bonds in this assembly enables the exchange of all four components. NoneThe use of this assembly to measure ee values of alcohols has been covered in depth. None,None,NoneIn this paper, a mechanistic investigation of this multi-component assembly is reported. Understanding the mechanism of this assembly should enable further exploitation of dynamic hemi-aminal ether formation in a variety of contexts. None-NoneIn our previous papers describing the use of the four-component assembly given inScheme 1, we postulated that the reaction proceededviaiminium ion2, which would then add alcohols to create hemi-aminal ethers that are thermodynamically stabilizedviabinding of Zn(ii) to the tren-like ligand. NoneMolecular sieves play a major role in the assembly process by scavenging water to drive the equilibrium involving alcohol incorporation. Depending on the absence or presence of molecular sieves in solution, the alcohol incorporation jumps from 40% to 90%, respectively (Table 1). Further, the Bronsted acid (CEM-HCl), used as a catalyst, is critical to the assembly. Without a Bronsted acid, no hemi-aminal ether is formed (Table 1). It was found that CEM-HCl is the most effective acid catalyst, and led to the best yield of the hemi-aminal ether complex when Bronsted acids were screened. NoneCEM-HCl forms 3,12-dioxa-6,9-diazoniadispiro[5.2.5.2]hexadecane in the presence ofDPAby slowly releasing hydrochloric acid (Scheme 2). NoneIn addition to the necessity of molecular sieves, one needs an excess of alcohol to drive the assembly to completion. Fig. 1Ashows the yield of the assembly as a function of the number of equivalents of an alcohol (4-penten-2-ol). As previously reported, the assembly with chiral alcohols results in circular dichroism (CD) signals. Fig. 1Bdisplays the CD intensity as a function of alcohol concentration, which shows that an excess of the alcohol is required to ensure complete assembly. To ensure saturation in the assembly reactions, all experiments for ee determination are conducted using 3 equiv. or more of alcohol. Because molecular sieves and excess alcohol are required to drive the reaction to completion, it was anticipated that the value of the equilibrium constant (Keq) between1and3must be less than 1. The1H NMR chemical shifts of1and3are distinct, and thus it is a simple matter of integration of the respective resonances to measure aKeqvalue, along with knowledge of the starting concentrations of all reactants:1, alcohol and a controlled amount of water (eqn (1)). Thus, with an initial concentration of1being 35 mM, water at 35 mM, and alcohol at 175 mM, eqn (1) yielded aKeqvalue of 0.042. NoneNoneAlthough not commonly isolated, iminium salts have been characterized previously. NoneWith this precedent in mind, we set out to create iminium2as a means to test the validity of its formation as the intermediate in the assembly process shown inScheme 1. To isolate salt2, we used powerful Lewis acids such as TMS-OTf and BF3-OEt2to facilitateDPAaddition to2-PA(Scheme 3). In an NMR tube, upon addition of one equivalent of TMS-OTf or BF3-OEt2to a mixture of2-PAandDPAin CD3CN (60 mM), resonances for a new product along with unreacted2-PAwere observed. The1H NMR spectrum was not consistent with2as the product because two inequivalent CH2-groups were formed and the hydrogens on each CH2were diastereotopic (see ESINone). When excess BF3-OEt2(more than 2 equiv.) was used to push the addition ofDPAto completion in acetonitrile, a yellow precipitate was isolated at 0 degrees C. The precipitate was separated and crystals were grown by slow diffusion of diethyl ether into a solution of the yellow solid in acetonitrile at 0 degrees C. X-ray diffraction analysis revealed pyridinium salt5(Fig. 2). However, addition of water or alcohol and Zn(OTf)2to the pyridinium salt5did not produce good yields of the hemi-aminal1or hemi-aminal ether3, respectively. Instead, a myriad of additional un-isolable products were created. Therefore, although while pyridinium salt5can be isolated, it must not actually be the correct intermediate formed in the assembly. We interpret this evidence as supporting iminium2as the true intermediate that reacts with water or an alcohol to create1or3, respectively. One rationalization for these results come from Baldwin's rules. None,NoneThe cyclization of2to5is 5-endo-trig, which is forbidden by these rules. A second rationalization comes from the expected lifetime of an iminium in the presence of water. For example, in water as the solvent, iminium ions have lifetimes on the order of only picoseconds. None-NoneHence, irrespective of the intramolecularity of the pyridine, only in the absence of an external water or alcohol nucleophile does the cyclization occur. Apparently, in the presence of these nucleophiles their intermolecular addition outcompetes the intramolecular addition of pyridine. As described above, the three-component assembly readily forms the hemi-aminal complex1, and with assistance of a Bronsted acid catalyst will create the hemi-aminal ether3in the presence of an alcohol. Therefore, to explore the mechanism of formation of3it was most convenient to start with preformed1. A plausible mechanism for the creation of3is given inScheme 4. It starts with loss of Zn(ii) from the tren-like ligand, followed by acid-catalyzed elimination of water to create2. Given that2is the highest-energy species along the sequence, either of the two steps prior to formation of2could be rate-determining. Thus, we set out to determine if loss of metal or elimination of water is the slow step leading to2. As shown inScheme 5, the two steps leading to the intermediate can be combined to simplify the mathematical analysis, although either of the two steps could be rate-limiting. The form of the rate expression predicts a second order reaction at low concentrations of alcohol (first order in1and alcohol). To test this dependence, we analyzed the reaction with first order in1and zero order in alcohol using three equivalents of alcohol (and no molecular sieves). The standard plot of (ln{[A]o/([A]o- [P])})versustime gave a plot with significant curvature (Fig. 3), therefore not conforming to first order kinetics. However, the rate expression predicts that the reaction should become increasingly first-order in1and zero-order in alcohol as the alcohol concentration increases. The mechanism is analogous to an SN1 reaction where at high concentrations of nucleophile a zero order dependence of nucleophile is the norm. As seen inFig. 3, the kinetic plot becomes increasingly linear, and at 18 or more equivalents of alcohol the plot conforms nicely to pseudo-first order kinetics. Under these conditions the concentration of alcohol is large enough to compete with any residual water or water released during the reaction. The rate constantk-1is predicted to be larger thank2due to a larger nucleophilicity of water relative to alcohols due to water's smaller size. NoneThus, it takes an excess of alcohol to cause the rate expression to simplify to first order in1only. When 2 equivalents of water were added at this high concentration of alcohol, the rate drops drastically and the reaction loses first order behaviour, analogous to the common ion effect in an SN1 reaction. NoneThis kind of kinetics is referred to as saturation kinetics, and it is indicative of a pre-equilibrium prior to the formation of a high energy intermediate which then reacts with the alcohol. Taking the values of the initial slopes inFig. 3, where the concentration of alcohol was the only variable, leads to the graph shown inFig. 4. Zero-order dependence on alcohol in the reaction was verified from the plateau in this plot. The experiments given above, however, do not distinguish as to whether the loss of Zn(ii) or the loss of water is the slow step leading to the intermediate. The mechanism given inScheme 4has analogous steps leading to the intermediate, either starting from reactant1or product3. The difference is the departure of water or departure of alcohol directly before formation of intermediate2. The rate of departure of water is predicted to be slower than that of alcohol due to the increased stability of the hemi-aminal over the hemi-aminal ether, as revealed from the equilibrium constant measured (see above). However, the difference in the rate of loss of Zn(ii) from either the hemi-aminal1or the hemi-aminal ether3is likely minimal. Thus, to reveal whether metal loss or leaving group departure is the slow step in formation of the intermediate(s), we followed the time course for the forward and reverse reaction during the initial period of the transformations. The reactions involve the addition of alcohol to1or water to3. All experiments were performed with the concentration of2-PAat 0.035 M, and that of alcohol or water fixed at 0.175 M. By fitting a linear line to the first 10% of the reaction, we were able to estimate rate constants of the two reactions (Fig. 5). We find rate constants that are approximately the same (0.30 h-1vs.0.35 h-1). This was the first experiment that indicated that the rate-determining step in the hemi-aminal to hemi-aminal ether transformation is loss of the metal. Although the forward and reverse rate constants are approximately the same, thereby indicating that the rate-determining steps for the forward and reverse reactions are both likely the loss of Zn(ii), it is true that the rate from hemi-aminal ether back to hemi-aminal is slightly faster, as would be predicted because an ROH is anticipated to be a better leaving group. Thus, we sought even stronger evidence that the loss of Zn(ii) is rate-determining, and therefore we performed a Hammett linear free energy analysis. To further explore the reaction mechanism a Hammett plot was generated. By plotting the log(kx/kH) values for various substituted2-PAsversusthe sigma electronic substituent constant (sigma) a Hammett plot was generated. Hammett plots are informative because they show how reaction mechanisms vary as a function of the electronic changes induced by substituents. NoneA series of 2-pyridinecarboxaldehyde derivatives bearing electron-donating or electron-withdrawing substituents that areparato the aldehyde were investigated for the reaction of1to3using 4-penten-2-ol as the alcohol (Fig. 6). From the Hammett plot (log(kx/kH)versus sigmaNone),rhowas obtained as the slope. rhodescribes the sensitivity of the reaction to substituent effects. The calculatedrhovalue from the graph is positive. This leads to the conclusion that negative charge is building during the rds of the assembly, or alternatively that there is a loss of positive charge. The two possible rate-determining steps for the formation of intermediate2either involve loss of the Zn(ii) cation or formation of a positive iminium ion, respectively. Loss of a cation is analogous to increased negative charge, whereas formation of an iminium ion involves generation of a positive charge. Because a positiverhovalue was found, this supports loss of Zn(ii) as the rds in the conversion of1to3, and this was also supported by the fact that the forward and reverse reaction rate constants ofScheme 5are basically the same. A Hammett plot usingsigma+was also generated (see ESINone). Such a Hammett plot includes resonance, whereassigmaprimarily reflects induction. The plot usingsigma+contained significantly more scatter, with aR2value of 0.84 compared to the normal Hammett plot (R2of 0.977). This is in further accordance with our conclusion that the rds is the loss of Zn(ii). If the rds was instead the loss of water, we would predict a better Hammett plot withsigma+because2is stabilizedviadirect resonance with the substituents. However, the substituents primarily effect metal chelationviainduction. The experiments described above allow one to create a qualitative reaction coordinate diagram (Fig. 7) for the interconversion of1(A) and3(P). First, because the equilibrium constant for the reaction is less than 1, the energy ofAand alcohol is placed lower thanPand water (DeltaGo). Second, because the loss of Zn(ii) fromAandPwas found to have similar rate constants, the barriers leading fromAandPtoL1andL2, respectively, are placed the highest on the diagram and their activation energies are comparable (DeltaG1None= DeltaG2None). Next, we place intermediateIin the center of the diagram, which our results support as being2rather than5. Third, because water is a better nucleophile than an alcohol, the barrier fromItoL1(DeltaGL1None) is drawn lower than the barrier ofItoL2(DeltaGL2None). The remaining question is the relative energies ofL1andL2, and whether their energy difference is similar to the difference in their activation energies to achieveI. However, we postulated above that the bond strengths between OH and OR inAandPlikely do not change significantly whether or not Zn(ii) is bound. Thus, fourth, the energy difference betweenL1andL2should be similar to that betweenAandP. This reasoning led to the qualitative placement ofL1andL2on the diagram. The third and fourth insights used here to generate the reaction coordinate diagram also led to the conclusion that the activation energy to formIfromL1is higher than fromL2toI. This is consistent with the notion that an alcohol is a better leaving group than water. Mechanistic studies of the four-component assembly involving2-PA, DPA, Zn(ii), a secondary alcohol, and catalytic acid revealed several insights. First, the equilibrium lies toward hemi-aminal1, and thus the creation of a high yield of3requires molecular sieves. Further, the reaction can be driven toward3viathe use of excess alcohol. Attempts to isolate the previously-postulated iminium ion2instead led to the isolation of a pyridinium salt5. Yet,5does not give the correct products and its formation is not allowedviaBaldwin's rules, and thus5must form more slowly than the reaction of2with water or alcohols. The transformation of1to3is first order in1and zero order in alcohol only at high alcohol concentration, thus showing saturation kinetics in alcohol, analogous to an SN1 reaction. This supports the creation of a high-energy intermediate that reacts in a fast step with alcohol. The rate-determining step in the formation of this intermediate is not the acid-catalyzed expulsion of water, but rather the decomplexation of Zn(ii) from the assembly. This conclusion is supported both by the fact that the forward and reverse rate constants for interconversion of1and3are basically the same, and by a positive Hammettrhovalue that supports loss of a positive charge in the rds. The mechanistic insights given herein should be informative for other dynamic reactions involving interconversions of hemi-aminals to hemi-aminal ethers.