In 1993, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved the first drug for the treatment of multiple sclerosis (MS), the immunosuppressive cytokine IFN-beta1bNone,None. Currently, more than two decades later, clinicians have a choice of 12 drugs - all immunomodulatory in nature - from which to devise therapeutic strategiesNone, an unprecedented advance for a disease that was first defined in the mid-19thcenturyNone. Nonetheless, while the available therapeutics have been found to be effective at delaying or alleviating relapses with varying degrees of success, it has now become apparent that strategies that provide CNS protection and/or CNS repair are needed for a comprehensive therapeutic approach to MSNone-None. This realization has encouraged examination into non-immune strategies by which MS may be targeted. Though the etiology of MS is unknown, it is primarily recognized as an autoimmune disease that is characterized by inflammation, oligodendrocyte loss, demyelination, and axonal degenerationNone. Recent studies strongly suggest that the progression of disease is driven by irreparable axon lossNone-None. Attention in the field has thus focused on CNS reparative approaches to prevent this degeneration. Oligodendrocytes, which not only produce and maintain myelin but also provide trophic support to axonsNone,None, have hence entered the spotlight as the primary target cell for potential new MS therapiesNone. These complimentary approaches may be grouped into three categories. In MS, the loss of mature, myelin-maintaining oligodendrocytes and pre-myelinating oligodendrocyte precursor cells (OPCs) during inflammation has been well-documented. Nonetheless, unaffected OPCs have been observed to quickly proliferate, migrate to the areas of damage, and undergo differentiation in order to remyelinate unprotected axons as neededNone-None. The remission of symptoms in early-stage relapsing-remitting MS patients has been attributed in large part to this effective repair processNone. As inflammatory events accumulate, however, remissions become less common and less reparativeNone. The first two therapeutic strategies therefore seek to address the finding that the increasing disability in MS patients is correlated with the gradual inability of OPCs, despite their presence in damaged areas, to differentiate and properly remyelinate the demyelinated axons. In these two related approaches, pathways relevant to these events are tested for their ability to force OPCs to differentiate or to enhance the ability of differentiating OPCs to remyelinate axons after inflammatory events (reviewed inNone). The subject of this review is the third approach, which seeks to protect mature oligodendrocytes and OPCs, and thus myelin and axons, from inflammatory-mediated cell death altogether. Current work in this area has centered on an innate protective mechanism called the integrated stress response (ISR). Manipulations of the ISR in preclinical models of MS have indicated that the pathway plays an important role in the survival of oligodendrocytes during inflammationNone. Here, we review the progress that has been made in this field and future work that may contribute to the establishment of an effective therapeutic that enhances the ISR to protect oligodendrocytes in MS. The ISR is a cytoprotective mechanism that maintains cellular proteostasis in response to stress conditions such as oxygen-glucose deprivation, hypoxia/ischemia, viral infection, amino acid starvation, and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, which occurs when there is an accumulation of misfolded or unfolded proteins in the ERNone(Figure 1). Activation of the ISR occurs when the eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2 alpha (eIF2alpha) is phosphorylated, which diminishes global translation while selectively upregulating translation of chaperone and protective proteins such as the transcription factor ATF4 (Figure 2). These steps seek to restore proteostasis by decreasing the influx of proteins while increasing the chaperone to protein ratio. As part of a tight negative feedback loop that guarantees that translational activity is restored once stress is relieved, ATF4 also upregulates the transcription factor C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP), which in turn increases expression of growth arrest and DNA-damage inducible 34 (GADD34), an essential non-enzymatic cofactor of protein phosphatase 1c (PP1c) that dephosphorylates p-eIF2alpha in a stress-dependent manner. Further protection of this key translational pathway exists in the form of a constitutive, stress-independent eIF2alpha phosphatase, CReP. The existence of two phosphatase complexes is particularly notable as it allows specificity in the control of this pathway, such that it is possible to only manipulate stressed cells. Importantly, a final mechanism is in place should efforts to restore proteostasis fail: the protein CHOP has been found to activate the transcription of genes involved in apoptosis. The ISR therefore attempts to protect the cell by encouraging proteostasis and, if this is not successful, resorts to destroying the damaged cell (reviewed inNone). The highly protective role of the ISR during ER stress indicated that it could play an important role in the survival of oligodendrocytes, which are required to produce a vast amount of membrane protein in a short time span. Other "secretory cells", such as pancreatic beta cells, have been found to be particularly susceptible to ER stress due to their large protein production requirementsNone,None. Thus, it was hypothesized that oligodendrocyte loss in MS might be due to the additional stress created by the MS inflammatory environment, which increases demands on protein production and the secretory pathway, thereby overwhelming the already-stressed cell (Figure 3). For example, the T cell-derived inflammatory cytokine interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) causes oligodendrocytes to dramatically increase the expression of the antigen-presenting MHC Class I molecules, which are assembled in the secretory pathway and have been shown to be deleterious to oligodendrocyte function and viabilityNone,None. A number of cytotoxic factors that activate the ISR have been implicated as pathogenic effectors in MS (Table 1), suggesting that the ISR might represent a critical response in MS lesions. This speculation was supported when key markers of the ISR were found to be upregulated in human MS tissuesNone. In post-mortem human MS samples, immunohistochemical analysis demonstrated an increase in CHOPNone, notably at the edge of chronic active MS lesions. Using laser capture microdissection, transcript levels of CHOP and ATF4 were also found to be significantly increased in the perilesions of chronic plaques, and in the case of ATF4, active plaques of biopsied patient brain samples from primary progressive and relapsing-remitting patientsNone. Interestingly, in these samples the authors also detected significant increases in levels of CHOP and ATF4 mRNA in normal appearing white-matter (NAWM), which they suggest may indicate "pre-lesional" activity, similar to that found by several other groupsNone,None. Likewise, in a frequently used mouse model of MS, experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), upregulation of ISR proteins have been detected during disease in lesioned tissueNone,None. By finding increased expression of key ISR proteins at the center and edge of actively demyelinating lesions, these studies provide evidence that the ISR may participate in oligodendrocyte loss and myelin destruction in response to inflammation. It is worthy to note, however, that this well-documented expression of ISR proteins in MS tissue has been predominantly found in macrophages, microglia, and astrocytes. Nonetheless, as the majority of affected oligodendrocytes have already undergone cell death in the active lesions in which these studies have been conducted, direct detection of stressed oligodendrocytes may require the analysis of lesions at earlier disease stages. Investigations into the role of the ISR in protecting oligodendrocytes and myelin first required a method of modeling the inflammatory environment found in MS. As a pleiotropic cytokine that plays a key deleterious role in MS and EAE, IFN-gamma was found to be an ideal candidate. Secreted by activated T cells, IFN-gamma levels are normally undetectable in the CNS but rise considerably during the symptomatic phase of MSNone. Addition of IFN-gamma to differentiated oligodendrocytesin vitroresulted in cell death that was associated with activation of the ISRNone. Moreover, CNS-specific expression of IFN-gamma in young transgenic mice led to upregulation of the ISR in oligodendrocytes, mild hypomyelination, ataxia and tremor, and eventually oligodendrocyte apoptosisNone. Thisin vivomodel, called theGFAP/tTA; TRE/IFN-gamma transgenic mouse, was achieved using a tetracycline-regulated approach, in which the transcriptional control region of the glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) gene drives expression of the tTA protein, which in turn activates the tetracycline regulatory element (TRE) that drives IFN-gamma expression specifically in the CNSNone. This mouse model system thus provides a means of delivering IFN-gamma to the CNS, via astrocyte expression, in a tetracycline-controlled manner. The evidence that the presence of IFN-gamma leads to oligodendrocyte apoptosis both in culture and in mice confirmed its use as a method of modeling inflammation. Initial studies to establish the role of the ISR in oligodendrocyte and myelin protection centered on experiments with protein kinase RNA-like ER kinase (PERK). PERK is the earliest responder to ER stress, undergoing dimerization and autophosphorylation when deleterious accumulation of misfolded or unfolded proteins threaten to overwhelm the cell. Once activated as p-PERK, the kinase is able to phosphorylate eIF2alphaNone. Loss of one allele of PERK has been shown to dramatically increase the sensitivity of cells to ER stressNone(Figure 4a, b). DevelopingGFAP/tTA; TRE/IFN-gamma transgenic mice that were haploinsufficient for PERK displayed a severely exacerbated phenotype such that they were runted, demonstrated severe tremor and ataxia, and exhibited significant hypomyelination and a large loss of mature oligodendrocytes. As expected, the oligodendrocytes in these mice also had lower levels of p-eIF2alpha compared to mice with both copies of PERK intactNone. Further characterization of the importance of the ISR in oligodendrocytes was accomplishedin vivoby eliminating both alleles of PERK specifically in mature oligodendrocytes in mice. Although oligodendrocyte and myelin development occurred normally in these mice when unperturbed, they experienced an exacerbated disease course and increased loss of oligodendrocytes, myelin, and axons when immunized with EAENone. Together, these findings show that when the ability to activate the ISR by phosphorylating eIF2alpha is diminished during stress, oligodendrocyte survival and myelin health is severely compromised, indicating that the ISR normally provides protection to oligodendroctyes against inflammation. This conclusion is further supported by the results of converse experiments in which upregulation of PERK activity was shown to be protective of oligodendrocytes and myelin. When adultGFAP/tTA; TRE/IFN-gamma transgenic mice that were immunized with EAE expressed IFN-gamma prior to EAE symptom onset, p-PERK and p-eIF2alpha levels were found to be increased specifically in oligodendrocytesNone. This enhancement of ISR activity prior to EAE symptom onset protected oligodendrocytes and myelin, resulting in a milder disease course compared to transgenic mice that did not express IFN-gamma. Loss of one allele of PERK in these transgenic mice removed the protection seenNone. This ISR-mediated protection of oligodendrocytes was found to occur despite the lack of innate or adaptive immune system involvementNone,None,None. Indeed, further studies demonstrated that phosphorylation of eIF2alpha in oligodendrocytes, independent of ER stress or other cellular stressors, was sufficient to confer oligodendrocyte and myelin protection from immune attack during EAE, resulting in attenuated EAE symptomsNone. This was achieved by the generation of an artificial PERK derivative that activated PERK kinase activity upon addition of a chemical dimerizerNone. The protection of oligodendrocytes and myelin from inflammatory loss by PERK activation in these experiments further attest to the important role the ISR plays in the survival of oligodendrocytes and myelin. The transcription factor CHOP is an immediate downstream target of ATF4 activity in stressed cells. CHOP in turn activates the expression of a number of pro-apoptotic genes, suggesting that it regulates a maladaptive response to cellular stressNone,None. Consistent with this possibility, a number of studies have shown that mutant cells in which the CHOP gene is inactivated display increased resistance to cytotoxic insults (reviewed inNone). In preliminary data from our laboratory we have observed enhanced survival of CHOP mutant oligodendrocytes in models of CNS inflammation (Dzhashiashvili et al., unpublished observations). Nevertheless, in a mouse model of the childhood leukodystrophy Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease (PMD), which is caused by mutations in the abundant myelin membrane protein proteolipid protein (PLP), CHOP expression has been shown to be protective to the mutant oligodendrocytesNone. These contrasting results suggest that the role of CHOP in oligodendrocytes may be context-dependent, which will require further analyses for our complete understanding and potential therapeutic exploitation. Additional insights into the protective role of the ISR were generated by manipulating the major phosphatase responsible for dephosphorylating eIF2alpha. GADD34 is an essential non-enzymatic cofactor of protein phosphatase 1 (PP1), which is expressed upon p-eIF2alpha-driven upregulation of ATF4. It is thus a critical component of the negative feedback loop that regulates stress-induced, ISR-controlled translation. Prolonged phosphorylation of eIF2alpha increases GADD34 expression, and upon forming a complex with PP1, GADD34-PP1 is able to dephosphorylate eIF2alpha and thus moderate the ISR protective responseNone. Upregulation of GADD34 is thus significant during stress-induced ISR activity:GFAP/tTA; TRE/IFN-gamma transgenic mice that express IFN-gamma in the CNS display a significant increase in GADD34 levels in oligodendrocytesNone. In an experiment that demonstrated that inhibiting dephosphorylation of eIF2alpha had a similar effect to enhancing its phosphorylation, loss of both alleles of GADD34 in theGFAP/tTA; TRE/IFN-gamma transgenic mice significantly diminished oligodendrocyte loss and hypomyelination, resulting in a much milder phenotype without affecting IFN-gamma levelsNone(Figure 4c). These results further demonstrated that the genetic enhancement of the ISR has the potential to provide protection to oligodendrocytes against inflammation. The genetic mouse models involving PERK and GADD34 established the proof of principle that enhancing the ISR results in protection of oligodendrocytes and myelin during inflammation, laying the foundation for testing this hypothesis with potential therapeutics. Salubrinal, a small chemical compound, was found to inhibit the dephosphorylation of p-eIF2alpha, thus protecting cells from ER stressNone. Addition of salubrinal to developing rat hippocampal slice cultures concomitantly with IFN-gamma decreased the hypomyelination and oligodendrocyte loss that resulted from addition of IFN-gamma aloneNone. Although these results were promising, the use of the compound as a therapeutic was found to be limited as salubrinal inhibited stress-induced as well as constitutive p-eIF2alpha dephosphorylation, resulting in translational inhibition that could not be mitigated. The discovery in 2011 that the drug guanabenz selectively inhibited GADD34-PP1 stress-induced dephosphorylationNone(Figure 4d) while sparing CReP-PP1 constitutive dephosphorylation was therefore welcome news. Guanabenz, an orally administered small molecule that is FDA-approved for hypertension, was also able to protect oligodendrocytes and myelin from IFN-gamma-mediated loss in slice culturesNone. In addition, guanabenz treatment of the IFN-gamma-expressingGFAP/tTA; TRE/IFN-gamma transgenic mice resulted in significantly decreased oligodendrocyte and myelin loss compared to untreated mice. Treatment of wild type chronic EAE mice with guanabenz immediately prior to disease onset not only ameliorated but also delayed clinical disease, accompanied by an increase in p-eIF2alpha levels in oligodendrocytes. Likewise, guanabenz treatment in relapsing-remitting EAE mice after onset of disease was found to alleviate relapse, demonstrating that the drug was effective in a situation more similar to a clinical settingNone. As EAE is a T cell driven model of MSNone, however, efforts were made to determine whether guanabenz might be directly affecting the immune system rather than protecting oligodendrocytes in the chronic EAE mice, with results indicating that either means of impact, if not both, might be working in this model systemNone. The uncertainty lies in the observation that oligodendrocyte protection has an indirect dampening effect on the CNS immune response likely mediated by limiting CNS myelin antigen presentationNone,None. Nevertheless, the body of work using guanabenz treatments both in culture and in several mouse models of MS indicate that pharmacological enhancement of the ISR can clearly confer oligodendrocyte and myelin protection against inflammation. These encouraging results have inspired the initiation of a Phase I clinical trial at the National Institutes of Health (NIH) to determine at what dosage guanabenz can be tolerated in MS patientsNone. In this trial, relapsing-remitting MS patients that have been on glatimer acetate for a minimum of one year are being given gradually escalating doses of guanabenz in a combinatorial treatment to determine the maximum tolerated dose (MTD) in MS patients as a primary outcome. Participants will be screened to have either active inflammation, defined as the development of new T2 hyperintense or contrast enhancing lesions by MRI during a two month screening period, or stable inflammation, defined as no documentation of MS relapse within the year prior to enrollment, no development of new T2 hyperintense or contrast enhancing lesions by MRI during the screening period, and no development of more than two lesions per year relative to an MRI performed at least one year prior to screening. Patients will also be evaluated throughout the five-month study using MRI, patient-reported outcomes and clinical assessments. If the drug is well-tolerated, a larger Phase II efficacy trial is planned in relapsing-remitting MS patients. It is evident from these studies that the ISR plays a significant role in the survival of oligodendrocytes and myelin during inflammation. In fact, the ISR may show even greater promise: recent studies have indicated that enhancement of the ISR may also promote remyelination. Accumulating evidence has made it clear that remyelination failure is in large part due to the insufficient repopulation of oligodendrocytesNone,None. As remyelinating oligodendrocytes appear to be more sensitive to the deleterious effects of IFN-gamma compared to developing or mature oligodendrocytesNone, it stands to reason that a strategy to protect remyelinating oligodendrocytes from the inflammatory environment, such as enhancement of the ISR, would be beneficial. This hypothesis has been tested in cuprizone-fed and EAE mice. Cuprizone feeding is often used as a method of studying remyelination in mice, as consumption of the copper chelator induces massive demyelination followed by robust remyelinationNone. Cuprizone-fedGFAP/tTA; TRE/IFN-gamma transgenic mice that express IFN-gamma were found to have slower remyelination capabilities compared to wild type control mice on cuprizoneNone. To determine what impact the ISR might have on remyelination, haploinsufficient PERK mice were studied in this remyelination paradigm. These ISR-deficient, IFN-gamma-expressing mice demonstrated even slower remyelination capabilities than those with two functioning alleles of PERKNone. Once it was clearly established that the ISR did play a role in remyelination, a converse experiment was conducted using EAE mice. Mice immunized with EAE were allowed to achieve high clinical scores such that they were at the peak of clinical disease, a timepoint where demyelination and oligodendrocyte loss is typically near its highest. PERK was then activated in the mice using the aforementioned chemical dimerizer approach. Excitingly, these EAE mice displayed significantly enhanced remyelination and higher mature oligodendrocyte numbersNone, further emphasizing that a therapy that involves ISR enhancement will benefit the treatment of MS. While treatments involving pathways important in protein translation are often met with pause, the highly cell-specific activity of the ISR makes it an ideal candidate for therapeutic targeting. Unstressed cells typically express low levels of p-eIF2alpha, such that healthy cells should be minimally impacted by the inhibition of GADD34-mediated eIF2alpha dephosphorylation through drugs such as guanabenz. Unstressed cells treated with guanabenz, for example, have normal p-eIF2alpha levelsin vivoNoneand display normal translational activityin vitroNone. Indeed, the complete deletion of GADD34 in mutant mice, which are unaffected clinically, resulted in normal p-eIF2alpha levels both in vitroNoneandin vivoNone, indicating that a therapy involving the ISR should selectively affect only those cells experiencing a cytotoxic event and hence have minimal side effects. Nonetheless, any potential therapies involving manipulation of such a central pathway must be carefully considered. While enhancement of the ISR with guanabenz, for example, appears to be specific to only stressed oligodendrocytes, how it might affect other cells in which the ISR is a key regulator has yet to be addressed. Moreover, the presence of concomitant diseases would likely complicate use of this treatment scheme - in most cancers, for example, driving the ISR towards a pro-apoptotic condition may be beneficialNone. Indeed, considerations also exist regarding the potential disadvantages of the basic premise of enhancing neuroprotection in MS. While ISR upregulation clearly confers protection to mature and developing oligodendrocytes, it is thought that death of mature oligodendrocytes may be a driving factor for subsequent oligodendrocyte precursor cell proliferation and differentiationNoneto replenish the lost cells. Would ISR-mediated protection of oligodendrocytes hence stunt this crucial process? This point is particularly important as studies have suggested that mature, myelin-maintaining oligodendrocytes are incapable of producing new myelinNone. If this is the case, then any successful therapy must protect both the oligodendrocyte and its myelin to be beneficial. Though further studies are warranted to address these and additional considerations, multiple avenues are quickly becoming available that might realize the goal of an ISR-enhancing treatment more safely and effectively (Table 2). While guanabenz is clearly able to enhance ISR protection of oligodendrocytes and myelinin vitroandin vivoduring inflammationNone, the drug also functions as an alpha2-adrenergic agonistNone, an anti-hypertensive role that has been shown to have side effects such as drowsiness and dry mouth in patients. In addition, though its FDA-approved status will significantly accelerate the use of guanabenz in patients, its post-patent standing makes it less desirable for drug companies to pursue. Recent reports have demonstrated, however, that these concerns are already being addressed: one group has synthesized and characterized a guanabenz derivative, Sephin1, which was found to retain the GADD34-PP1 specific inhibition displayed by guanabenzin vitroandin vivowhile minimizing its anti-hypertension side effectsNone, while another group has identified and found similar characteristics in an additional two more guanabenz derivativesNone. Thus, second-generation small molecule inhibitors of eIF2alpha dephosphorylation will likely be soon tested in inflammatory demyelinating disorders. Transplantation of neural stem cells as a regenerational therapy method for MS has recently gained traction (reviewed inNone,None). Eventually, this technique may be routine enough to begin tests with genetically modified neural stem cells that display increased resistance to inflammatory insults. As miceNoneand cellsNonelacking GADD34 have been found to have normal levels of p-eIF2alpha until stressed, transplantation of stem cells in which GADD34 is inactivated, for example, would theoretically allow regenerated areas to withstand additional inflammatory attack via ISR enhancement without the side effects of constitutive translational inhibition. Meanwhile, genetic therapies are rapidly becoming more reliable, indicating that somatic cell genetic manipulation techniques to enhance the ISR may eventually be realized in patients. Similar to the effect of modified stem cells, gene knockdown of GADD34 using RNA interference (RNAi) may prove useful. For example, short hairpin RNA (shRNA) knockdown in mice of cFLIP, a caspase 3 inhibitor that is upregulated by IFN-gamma, has been shown to increase oligodendrocyte and myelin lossNone, demonstrating thatin vivoRNAi is able to affect oligodendrocyte and myelin outcomes. The use of antisense oligonucleotides (ASOs) to modulate gene expression has also recently been receiving increased attention as a therapeutic approach with a number of clinical trials ongoingNone. Advances in ASO chemistry have resulted in ASOs with dramatically extended half-lives, resulting in long-lived modulation of gene expressionNone. The use of ASOs to enhance the ISR is particularly exciting since this approach would limit the effect on gene expression to the CNS. Moreover, the increasingly widespread and effective use in research of highly specific gene editing tools such as the CRISPR/Cas9 system suggests that therapies that use such methods may be available soonNone. Thein vivogenetic inactivation of GADD34 in oligodendrocyte lineage cells, for example, would likely provide increased protection to these cells against inflammation. The demonstration that enhancement of the ISR is capable of protecting oligodendrocytes and myelin from inflammatory loss provides an additional key approach to a comprehensive treatment that might finally be capable of stopping MS disease activity. In combination with immunomodulatory drugs, which minimize the innate inflammation that occurs in an autoimmune disease, and upcoming reparative drugs, which enhance oligodendrocyte differentiation and remyelination capabilities, ISR-mediated protective therapies may ensure that the majority, if not complete, spectrum of the disease will finally be adequately addressed. At minimum, use of such combinatory therapies should improve the overall efficacy of treatments, allowing the option of bypassing current anti-inflammatory drugs with greater side effects, such as Tysabri, in favor of milder alternatives. Results to date are encouraging, such that enhancement of the ISR appears to be a promising addition to the growing therapeutic options for MS.