Medulloblastoma, the most common malignant brain tumor of childhood, comprises four consensus molecular subtypes [Wnt/Wingless (WNT), Sonic Hedgehog (SHH), Group 3 and Group 4] characterized by distinct clinical, molecular and pathological features, and by different postulated cells of origin. None-NoneThese advances are rapidly informing targeted therapeutic strategies and the design of individualized clinical trials aimed at increased cure rates and reduced long-term treatment side-effects. NoneTargeted therapies for MBSHH(~25% of patients) are currently most advanced. MBSHH(~70% five-year survival) peak in infancy, but also occur throughout childhood and into adulthood. NoneTumors are characterized by SHH signaling activation via mechanisms including pathway mutations (PTCH1(~45% of MBSHH),SUFU(~8%) andSMO(~14%)) and gene amplifications (GLI2(~8%),MYCN(~13%)). NoneEarly clinical trials of SHH pathway inhibitors (targeting SMO) show promise,None,Nonebut significant challenges are predicted in their application, with reported developmental toxicities,Noneacquired drug resistance,Noneand intrinsic insensitivity in tumors with pathway activation downstream of SMO (e.g. SUFUmutation,GLI2andMYCNamplification). NoneThus, there is clear need to identify additional targetable genes and pathways in MBSHH, to support additional or alternative targeted therapeutic strategies. The identification of therapeutically exploitable 'driver' events from the many aberrations identified in contemporary genome-wide genetic and epigenetic investigations represents a major challenge. Recent genome-wide mutational screens in MBSHHhave revealed notable genetic diversity, however the most frequent novel coding mutations characterize small patient groups (e.g. MLL2(~16% of MBSHH) andDDX3X(~26%)) and most mutations are found singly in individual tumors. None,NoneSignificantly, a prominent role for epigenetic alterations is also emerging. None,None-NoneOur recent DNA methylation profiling study of 230 medulloblastomas showed MBSHHharbor specific DNA methylation events which characterize significant proportions of tumors and identify candidate disease driver genes. NoneHowever, their functional relevance and contribution to tumor development is unknown. Genetically-engineered mouse models, which give rise to medulloblastoma with constitutive SHH pathway activation, support granule neuron precursors (GNPs) of the developing cerebellum as their cells of originNone,None-Noneand provide opportunities to systematically interrogate epigenetic events in the mouse medulloblastoma genome. It may be reasoned that any conservation of aberrant DNA methylation events between MBSHHand SHH-driven mouse medulloblastomas could identify events important in tumorigenesis and provide faithful model systems for their functional investigation. Here we report a cross-species investigation of DNA methylation events in medulloblastomas from 230 human patients (216 with subgroup assigned (50 MBSHH, 28 WNT,44 Group 3, 94 Group 4)) and four independent SHH mouse models. Using this approach, we identify regional hypo-methylation ofVAV1, leading to its elevated expression, as a conserved and widespread epigenetic event in both species, affecting the majority of MBSHHtumors. We further show (i)VAV1status predicts poor treatment outcome within the MBSHHsubgroup and (ii)VAV1plays a critical functional role in medulloblastoma maintenance, highlighting its clear potential as a biomarker and validated drug target in MBSHH. Finally, we provide evidence that Vav1 is expressed in early cerebellar GNPs, where its activity regulates their development. The roles characterized forVAV1in MBSHH, and in cerebellar development, demonstrate the potential of comparative tumor epigenomics using genetically-engineered mice to identify, prioritize and functionally analyze critical molecular events in human tumorigenesis. We first sought to identify DNA methylation events which may contribute to human MBSHH. We have previously shown the four major medulloblastoma molecular disease subgroups -WNT, SHH, Group3 and Group 4 - may be distinguished based on their DNA methylation patterns (Supplementary Figure S1A). NoneComparison of tumor DNA methylation patterns of subgrouped medulloblastomas (n=216) with the normal cerebellum (n=21) showed normal cerebella form a distinct group, which is most closely related to MBSHH(Supplementary Figure S1B). Statistical analysis identified 15 genes (associated with 18 CpG sites) whose methylation status significantly distinguished MBSHHfrom other medulloblastomas, and from the normal cerebellum (Figure 1A). Both hypo- (n=6) and hyper-methylation (n=9) events were observed. In addition, the methylation status ofRASSF1AandCOL1A2CpG sites, two of the most frequent hyper-methylation events reported in medulloblastoma,None,Nonewas assessed and showed expected frequent and tumor-specific methylation which affected all tumor subgroups (Figure 1A). In summary, these investigations show MBSHHharbor distinct DNA methylation patterns and identify a series of gene-specific DNA methylation events for further analysis. We next assessed the DNA methylation status of regions orthologous to those encompassing the CpG sites identified in human MBSHHtumors, in medulloblastomas from four independent SHH-associated mouse models, alongside strain-matched normal cerebella of different developmental stages. Eight orthologous regions surrounding CpG sites which showed MBSHH-specific methylation, alongside regions surroundingRASSF1AandCOL1A2, were selected for analysis by direct bisulfite sequencing (Figure1,Supplementary Table S1andFigure S2A, B). The overall cerebellar methylation status was conserved in the majority of regions assessed (7/10;Figure 1C); cerebella from different mouse strains, including immature and mature mice, showed equivalent patterns (Figure 1B). Consistent methylation profiles were also observed across tumors from the different SHH-associated mouse models (Figure 1B). Most strikingly,VAV1showed widespread tumor-specific patterns of hypo-methylation across the regions examined which were of equivalent extent, magnitude and frequency in human MBSHHand SHH mouse tumor models, compared to cerebellar controls. In all mouse tumors, the majority of CpG sites across theVav1region were hypo-methylated (Figure 1B, C;Supplementary Figure S2C), while in humans,VAV1hypo-methylation encompassed all assessed CpG sites (Supplementary Figures S2BandS3A, B, C). Tal1,Dsc2,SpdefandRassf1aalso showed statistically significant methylation differences, but these represented methylation changes in individual samples or CpG sites and were not comparable to differences seen between human MBSHHtumors and cerebella (Figure 1B, C). These findings identify regionalVAV1hypo-methylation as a frequent evolutionarily conserved epigenetic event in human MBSHH, for further analysis. VAV1hypo-methylation was a frequent region-wide event in human MBSHH(70% (36/50)), affecting only occasional tumors (2% (4/166)) within the other molecular subgroups (Figure 2A, B;Supplementary Figure S3C). In whole-cohort analysis (n=230),VAV1hypo-methylation was significantly correlated with desmoplastic nodular (DN) pathology (p=2.3*10-11, Fisher's exact test), infant patients ( less than 3 years at diagnosis;p=0.003)) andMYCNgene amplification (p=0.02) (Figure 2C), consistent with the established associations of these features with MBSHHin this cohortNone. Within the MBSHHsubgroup,VAV1hypo-methylation was observed across tumors of all key clinical, pathological and molecular demographics, and did not associate with any particular medulloblastoma disease feature; it is however notable that allMYCNamplifications occurred inVAV1hypo-methylated tumors (Figure 2C). Associations were assessed using the CpG site recognized by theVAV1_e9 probe which lies within the region conserved between humans and mice. Notably,VAV1hypo-methylation was associated with a poor outcome amongst MBSHHtumors (Figure 2D), in an analysis of 36 patients aged greater than =3 years at diagnosis, who received standard upfront radiotherapy and chemotherapy and were derived predominantly from the PNET3 clinical trial. None,NoneThe rarity ofVAV1hypo-methylation in non-MBSHHprecluded the analysis of any relationships to survival in these subgroups. Thus,VAV1hypo-methylation occurs frequently within the MBSHHsubgroup and is associated with specific disease features and poor outcomes. VAV1showed a direct methylation-dependent relationship between methylation status and expression in human medulloblastoma cell lines treated with the DNA methyltransferase inhibitor, 5'-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-azaCdR) (Figure 3A, B). AllVAV1-methylated cell lines (D283Med, MEB-Med8a and D425Med) had lowVAV1expression which was upregulated following 5-azaCdR de-methylation. In contrast,VAV1expression was higher in hypo-methylated cells (DAOY) and was unaffected by 5-azaCdR. Consistent with this,Vav1expression was significantly increased in mouse tumors (all hypo-methylated) compared to normal adult cerebella (all methylated) (Figure 3C;Supplementary Figure S2C), and inVAV1hypo-methylated human tumors compared toVAV1methylated tumors or the normal human cerebellum (all methylated) (Figure 3D). Finally,VAV1expression was highest in MBSHHtumors (associated withVAV1hypo-methylation) compared to the other medulloblastoma molecular subgroups (Figure 3E; data from published datasetNone). These demonstrated relationships betweenVAV1methylation and expression are consistent with the hypo-methylation-dependent elevation ofVAV1expression in human and mouse SHH-subgroup medulloblastomas. To investigate the functional consequences ofVAV1hypo-methylation and expression in human medulloblastoma, we modelled the effect of silencing VAV1 over-expression in hypo-methylated human medulloblastoma cells. VAV1 silencing using siRNA (60-80% knockdown, day 3;Figure 4A, B) significantly decreased proliferation (Figure 4C) and altered cell cycle distribution; a pronounced G2arrest and increased G0/sub-G1fraction occurred following VAV1 knockdown (Figure 4D). These data support a pro-proliferative role for the elevated VAV1 expression observed inVAV1hypo-methylated human medulloblastoma cells. To address whether Vav1 was required for tumor growth in a mouse SHH medulloblastoma model, we purified tumor cells from spontaneously occurringVav1hypomethylated/overexpressing medulloblastomas arising inPtch1+/-Cdkn2c-/-mice (Figures 1,3C,Supplementary Figure S2C) and infected them with retroviruses carryingGFPalone, wild-typeVav1/GFPor a dominant-negative form of Vav1 (Vav1DN/GFPNone,None), an isolated amino terminal fragment (residues 1-186), which acts in trans to inhibit the GEF function of native Vav1. Cells from each infected pool were transplanted in the flanks of recipient nude mice and tumor formation assessed. Approximately two months post-implantation, tumors appeared on the flanks of all mice transplanted with tumor cells marked withGFPonly or withVav1/GFPviruses. These tumors harbored similar weights (Figure 5C). In contrast, tumors that developed after the transplant of tumor cells infected withVav1DN-carrying viruses were smaller than those derived fromGFPonly-infected cells and only 6 out of 9 transplants induced secondary tumors (Figure 5A-C). Thus, enforced expression of aVav1dominant-negative mutant inhibits tumor maintenance in our model. Ectopic over-expression of wild-type Vav1 did not impact, suggesting interference with the endogenous Vav1 expression associated with its hypo-methylation is important for the inhibition of tumor growth. To examine the contribution of retrovirally-infected cells to tumor development, we analyzed by FACS the percentage of infected GFP-positive tumor cells before transplant and in each secondary tumor. On average, we found a ~40% reduction ofVav1DN-infected GFP+cells in secondary tumors compared to the initially infected pool (Figure 5D). In contrast, when tumor cells were infected with GFP-only retroviruses, the percentage of GFP positive cells increased by ~ 20% in the secondary tumors (Figure 5D). Consistent with the tumor weight, enforced wild-typeVav1expression did not affect the percentage of GFP+cells in the secondary flank tumors (Figure 5D). In contrast, enforced wild-typeVav1expression did not appear to contribute significantly to medulloblastoma initiation in thePtch1NoneCdkn2cNonemodel. Cerebellar granule neuron progenitors (GNPs), the cell type of origin of MBSHH, were enriched from the cerebella of postnatal (P) day 7,Ptch1NoneCdkn2cNonepups, then infected with retroviruses carryingGFP-alone or co-expressing wild-typeVav1. Mycn-carrying retroviruses were used as a positive control. NoneAverage infection efficiencies were comparable (30.86% forGFP, 35.34% forVav1/GFPand 40.28% forMycn/GFP). Tumors failed to develop more than 6 months after stereotactic transplantation of GNPs, infected withGFPonly containing virus (n=7) or co-expressing wild-typeVav1(n=8), into the cerebral cortex. GNPs infected with aMycncontaining retrovirus induced medulloblastomas within 2 months as previously shown (n=7/7None) (Figure 5E). In summary, dominant-negative Vav1 suppressed medulloblastoma maintenance in ourPtch1NoneCdkn2cNonemouse model. We next examined whether Vav1 activity had any effect on the development of GNPs and postmitotic cerebellar granule neurons (CGNs). GNPs are located near the cerebellar surface in a germinal zone (GZ) called the external germinal layer (EGL), whereas after cell cycle exit and neuronal differentiation, CGNs exit their GZ by migrating away from the EGL to cross the molecular layer (ML) and eventually reside within the internal granule layer (IGL). NoneGNP or CGN position with the developing cerebellar cortex thus represent an excellent model to examine neuronal progenitor maturation, as cells of the CGN lineage occupy stereotyped positions in the developing cerebellar cortex dependent upon their differentiation status. NoneWe first found Vav1 was expressed at elevated levels in developing (P7) GNPs compared to cerebella from wild-type mice (Figure 6A). Then, we used electroporation of early post-natal mouse cerebellum followed byex vivoculture of organotypic cerebellar slices as an assay to examine GNP germinal zone (GZ) exit and migration initiation. NoneExpression constructs for Vav1DN and the fluorescent nuclear reporter H2B-mCherry were co-electroporated into the cerebellar cortices of P7 mice and cerebellar slices were culturedex vivo. While control GNPs remained within the EGL after 24 hours, cells expressing elevated Vav1DN entered the ML and IGL (Figure 6B, D), suggesting that inhibition of Vav1 activity is sufficient to induce precocious GZ exit. Given that Vav1 inhibition appeared to regulate GNP GZ exit and migration initiation, we next evaluated whether Vav1 activity could regulate GNP's GZ exit using a gain-of-function approach. Expression vectors for a constitutively active Vav1 lacking the auto-inhibitory amino terminal domain (Vav1CANone) were electroporated into P7 EGL. After 2 days ofex vivoculture, control CGNs initiated migration correctly and had entered the molecular layer and IGL while Vav1CA expressing CGNs remained within the EGL (Figure 6C, E), suggesting that activation of Vav-1 activity blocks GZ exit. Finally, we examined the morphology of Vav1DN and Vav1CA over expressing cells via time-lapse microscopy ofin vitroCGN cultures. Whilst control neurons and Vav1DN expressing neurons elaborated the long neurites of mature CGNs, Vav1CA expressing retained the short processes which are the characteristic of immature CGNs (SeeSupplementary Movies 1-3). Together, these data show Vav1 activity blocks GNP exit from the developing cerebellar germinal zone and indicate a role in normal cerebellar development. Our investigations of DNA methylation events in human MBSHHand four independent SHH mouse medulloblastoma models have identifiedVAV1hypo-methylation as a conserved and defining MBSHHevent which affects around 70% of human tumors, more common than any mutated gene (PTCH1(~45%) andTERT(~30%) are most frequent),None,None,Noneand which describes MBSHHof all key clinical, pathological and molecular demographics. Its complete regional de-methylation (Supplementary Figure S3), coupled with an absence of significant copy number alterations or mutations in large cohorts [data fromNone,None] indicates hypomethylation is its major mechanism of alteration. VAV1methylation status is intimately related to its expression;VAV1expression is controlled by methylation in human cell lines and its hypo-methylation, in both mouse and human tumors, is significantly associated with increased expression. Consistent with this, the region of uniform hypo-methylation we have characterized overlaps with the minimal region shown in mutagenesis studies to be sufficient to driveVAV1expression. NoneModelling VAV1 epigenetic silencing in mouse and human tumor models validated a role for VAV1 expression in SHH-associated tumor growth and maintenance. Introduction of dominant-negative Vav1 into tumor cells from established hypo-methylatedPtch1NoneCdkn2cNonemouse tumors significantly reduced tumor re-establishment and growth. In contrast, enforced expression of wild-typeVav1did not further increase tumorigenic potential, indicating endogenousVav1levels in hypo-methylated cells are sufficient to promote tumorigenesis. Further, the impact of VAV1 silencing on proliferation and cell cycle arrest inVAV1hypo-methylated human cells is consistent with VAV1-dependent effects in other cancer cell types,None,Nonewhile the identification ofVav1mutation as a SHH-cooperating event in a murine insertional mutagenesis screenNoneprovides further genetic evidence to substantiate its role in MBSHH. Any role for VAV1 in tumor initiation is less clear; enforcedVav1expression in engraftedPtch1NoneCdkn2cNoneGNPs did not cause tumor development, in contrast toMycncontrols. NoneHowever, given Ptch1's established role in initiation,Nonethese results do not preclude Vav1 involvement. Future strategies to examine any interaction betweenPtch1andVav1in spontaneous SHH-tumor formation, which account for endogenousVav1expressionNoneshould prove informative. The role of VAV1 in the majority of MBSHHtumors, together with the inhibition of tumor growth following its silencing, identify and validate VAV1 and its dependent pathways as important potential therapeutic targets. In particular, its homogeneous mechanism of activation and SHH-independence highlight potential applications for alternative or second-line / combination therapies with SHH pathway inhibitors. Consistent with its protumorigenic role,VAV1hypo-methylation was associated with a poor outcome in clinical trial-derived MBSHHpatients,None,Nonesupporting its utility as both a prognostic and predictive biomarker for use in stratified therapies. Multivariate survival analysis, validation in alternative cohorts, and investigations in all disease demographic groups, are now essential to confirm reproducibility of these initial findings prior to any clinical application. Vav1 is expressed in GNPs [the proposed cells of origin for MBSHHNone] during early cerebellar development. Our data show its activity blocks GNP exit from the developing cerebellar germinal zone, suggesting a mechanism by which disruption of these processes byVav1hypo-methylation and expression may contribute to medulloblastoma tumorigenesis. These findings further emphasize the intimate links between cerebellar development and medulloblastoma, and evidence that temporally/spatially restricted pathways in normal cerebellar development become constitutively activated during tumorigenesis. NoneCoupled with the established roles of SHH pathway activation in GNP proliferationNoneand MBSHH, our data also suggest common functions for Vav1 and SHH in both processes, and provide a basis for the investigation of any functional interaction. Interestingly, Vav3 plays roles in the migration of GNPs from the EGL to the IGL, and in the survival of GCNs in the IGLNone, implicating the involvement of multiple Vav family members in cerebellar development. Consideration of developmental toxicities will thus be essential in developing targeted therapies against VAV1, however thatVav1Nonemice are viable and healthy apart from impaired T-cell developmentNoneis encouraging. How might VAV1 exert its function? VAV1 expression is normally confined to the hematopoietic system, where its best characterized function is as a GDP/GTP nucleotide exchange factor for the Rho/Rac family of GTPases. However, roles in multiple diverse processes including activation of the JNK, ERK, Ras, NF-kB, and NFAT pathways, cytoskeleton organization, migration and TP53-mediated apoptosis have also been described. None,None,NoneDirect small molecule VAV1 inhibitors are not widely reported, however strategies against many of its candidate downstream pathways are in development. NoneA detailed exploration of the pathways impacted by VAV1 in MBSHHand normal cerebellar development will therefore now be essential to understand their mechanistic basis and to enable therapeutic targeting. Finally, available evidence suggests an emerging widespread relevance for VAV1 in tumor development. In addition to its expression in hematopoiesis and hematological malignancies,NoneVAV1expression has been reported in solid tumors including neuroblastomasNoneand pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas, where expression was associated with a poor survival outcome, and with demethylation of theVAV1promoter in tumor cell lines. NoneIn preliminary investigations of other pediatric brain tumor types,VAV1hypo-methylation at the CpG residues involved in MBSHHis also a feature of a proportion of posterior fossa ependymomas, high-grade gliomas and CNS-PNETs, as well as occasional non-MBSHHmedulloblastomas (Supplementary Figure S4;Figure 2), suggesting potential roles in their development for further investigation. DNA methylation profiling and consensus clustering of molecular subgroups was performed as previously describedNoneon 230 primary medulloblastomas (of which 216 were confidently assigned to a subgroup), alongside 21 normal non-neoplastic cerebella (representing fetal, infant and adult samplesNone), using the Illumina GoldenGate Cancer Panel I microarray. NoneThe DNA methylation status of 1505 CpG sites (807 genes) was represented as a beta-score from zero (unmethylated) to one (methylated). Subgroup status was additionally assessed using mRNA signature,Noneimmunohistochemistry (IHC)Noneand mutational (CTNNB1)Nonebiomarker assays. Four human medulloblastoma cell lines (D283Med, MEB-Med8a, D425Med and DAOY) were grown in the presence or absence of the demethylating agent 5-azaCdR as previously described. NoneCell lines were validated by confirmation of published karyotypes. NoneMouse medulloblastomas fromSmo/SmomiceNone,Ptch1NoneCdkn2cNonemiceNone,Cdkn2cNonep53None, Nestin-Cre+mice irradiated at P7NoneandSufuNonep53NonemiceNone(alln=3) were assessed alongside control cerebella from strain-matched non-transgenic mice. Percoll-enriched GNPs from post-natal P7 cerebellum and GNP-like tumor cells from spontaneously-arisen medulloblastomas were purified fromPtch1+/-Cdkn2c-/-mice. NoneP7 cerebellar GNPs were also purified from wild-type mice. CD-1nu/numice (Charles River Laboratories, Wilmington, MA) were used for cortical or flank transplantation. Wild type C57BL/6 mice (Charles River Laboratories, Wilmington, MA) were used forex vivocerebellar slice assays. All animal experiments were approved by and conducted in accordance with St. Jude Children's Research Hospital Animal Care and Use Committee guidelines. DNA and RNA were extracted from frozen tumors, tissues and cell lines using Trizol (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA), and DNA from FFPE samples using a Qiagen DNeasy kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA), according to manufacturer's instructions. CpG sites showing significant differences between the SHH and other medulloblastoma subgroups (combined) were identified (Mann-Whitney U test, retaining probes significant (p 0.05) after Benjamini-Hochberg false discovery rate (FDR) correction). All CpG sites identified showed an absolute change in average (mean) beta =0.34 between these groups. Differences in CpG methylation between the SHH subgroup and normal cerebella were assessed equivalently. Bisulfite DNA treatment was carried out using the Epitect bisulfite kit (Qiagen Ltd. Valencia, CA, USA), and PCR using standard reaction conditions (Supplementary Table S2). Purified products were directly sequenced with a CEQ DTCS kit (Beckman Coulter, High Wycombe, UK) and analyzed on a CEQ 2000XL DNA analysis system (Beckman Coulter). The methylation status at each CpG residue was determined by assessment of relative peak intensities, as previously described. NoneThe DNA methylation status (methylation score) of orthologous regions in the mouse and human genomes (mean, based on all sequenced CpG sites) was subsequently calculated for each region of interest. cDNA was synthesized from total RNA using a Biorad iScriptTM cDNA synthesis kit (Biorad, Irvine, CA, USA) according to manufacturer's instructions. Measurements ofVAV1transcript levels in mouse and human samples were determined using SYBR Green on the ABI PRISM 7900HT Detection System (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA), using the comparative Ct relative quantification method (Supplementary Table S2). Cells were seeded in 6- or 96-well plates and allowed to adhere for 24 hours, then transfected with 40nM small interfering RNA (siRNA) duplexes to VAV1 (sense strands: duplex1 CGUCGAGGUCAAGCACAUUdTdT;Noneduplex2 GCCAUCAGCAUUAAAUAUAdTdT, duplex3 UCAAAUACAAGGAGAGGUUdTdT (DharmaconGE, Layfayette, CO, USA) or negative control siRNA duplexes (sense UUCUCCGAACGUGUCACGUdTdT (Qiagen)) using LipofectamineTM RNAiMAX (Invitrogen), following the manufacturer's instructions. Cells were seeded at 1 *103in 96-well plates and allowed to adhere for 24 hours. The number of viable cells at day 0 (prior to siRNA addition) and days 1-5 (after addition) was quantified using an XTT cell proliferation assay kit (Roche, Hertfordshire, UK) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Experiments were performed in quadruplicate. Adherent cells were harvested with trypsin 36 and 48 hours after siRNA transfection, fixed in ice-cold 70% ethanol/30% phosphate buffered saline (PBS) solution, then resuspended in 40 mg/ml propidium iodide/0.1 mg/ml RNAse A (Sigma-Aldrich, Gillingham, UK) at 37 degrees C for 30 minutes, and assessed using a FACScan (Becton Dickinson Oxford, UK) and Modfit software (Verity software, Maine, USA). Experiments were performed in quadruplicate. Plasmids used for retrovirus production were generated using the mouse stem cell virus LTR (MSCV) backbone expressing the green fluorescent protein (GFP) downstream of the internal ribosomal entry site (IRES) pMSCV-IRES-GFP. The full-lengthVav1cDNA (amino acids 1-845 (pMSCV-Vav1-IRES-GFP)) and the N-terminal region (amino acids 1-186 (pMSCV-Vav1DN-IRES-GFP)) were inserted downstream of the MSCV LTR in the pMSCV-IRES-GFP plasmid. The pMSCV-Mycn-IRES-GFP construct and generation of retroviral stocks were previously described. NoneGNP-enriched mouse cerebellar and medulloblastoma cells were purified by percoll gradient. None,NonePurified cells were plated on Matrigel-coated dishes and infected with retroviruses (GFPalone,Vav1-IRES-GFP,Vav1DN-IRES-GFPandMycn-IRES-GFP). 2 days after infection, cells were harvested, re-suspended in Matrigel (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA, USA) and transplanted into CD-1 nu/nu mice (2.0 * 106cells/injection) as previously described. NoneGNPs infected withGFPalone,Mycn-IRES-GFPorVav1-IRES-GFPretroviruses were transplanted into the cortices of recipient mice. Virally-infected tumor cells were transplanted in the flank of naive recipient animals. Cortically-transplanted animals were sacrificed, when neurological symptoms were confirmed. Flank injections of virally-marked tumor cells were performed on both sides of each mouse; in the left side, 2.0*106tumor cells infected with GFP and on the other side, the same number of tumor cells infected with eitherVav1/GFPorVav1DN/GFPretroviruses. In parallel, a subset of infected cells was analyzed by FACS to calculate the efficiency of infection reflected by the percentage of GFP+cells. Transplanted mouse recipients were monitored daily; tumors were harvested and weighed, and tumor cells purified by Percoll gradient and analyzed by FACS for GFP expression as previously described. NoneWhole-cell extracts were prepared from human cell lines, wild-type 1 month-old whole cerebella, Percoll-purified GNPs from P7 cerebella, and mousePtchNonemedulloblastomas. 25-35 mg protein/sample was separated by gel electrophoresis and immunoblotted with defined antibodies as previously described. NonePrimary antibodies were VAV1 (C14; Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, CA, USA), Actin (Sigma-Aldrich) and HSC70 (K19; Santa Cruz). Appropriate secondary antibodies with horse radish peroxidise conjugates (Dakocymation Ltd, Glostrup, Denmark) were bound to the primary antibodies, followed by incubation with enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL or Dura) substrate (Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA), visualization by autoradiography, and densitometry using a Fuji-Las (Fujifilm Corporation, Tokyo, Japan) camera and the AIDA image analyzer program (Raytek, Sheffield, UK). Plasmids forex-vivocerebellar slice experiments were generated using the pCIG2 vector, which contains a CAG promoter for high-level expression in CGNs and GNPs. The dominant-negative form of Vav1 (Vav1DN), the constitutively active form of Vav1 (Vav1CA) or H2B-mCherry cDNAs were inserted downstream of the CAG promoter in the pCIG2 expression vector. Ex-vivocerebellar electroporation and organotypic slice culture was performed on P7 mouse cerebella as described previously. NoneMigration distance measurements of fixed slices were performed by marking the centre of individual cell nuclei marked by mCherry-H2B using the pen function of SlideBook (Intelligent Imaging Innovations, Denver, CO, USA), exporting the cellular coordinates and calculating the distance between the center of each cell and the cerebellar surface using a custom written algorithm in Igor Pro (Wavemetrics Inc, Lake Oswego, OR, USA). All measurements were analyzed statistically using Microsoft Excel and graphed using Kaleidagraph v4.03 (Synergy software systems, Reading, PA, USA). All array-based bioinformatic and statistical analyses were performed using R (v2.15.0)Noneand the stated statistical test. Survival analyses were performed using event-free survival (EFS) times. NoneSupplementary Table 1. Selection of differentially methylated human sequences and their mouse orthologs for investigation. Genes selected met the following criteria: (i) the human and mouse genomes harbored orthologous regions (Supplementary Figure S1A), (ii) methylation changes in human tumors affected multiple CpG sites in the region surrounding the array-associated probe site, and (iii) the average methylation levels at these additional sites were strongly correlated with the array site in human samples (r2 greater than 0.70;Supplementary Figure S1B). The probe sequence used to assay the human CpG site of interest on the Illumina GoldenGate Cancer Panel I methylation array was extended by 50bp proximally and distally using the reference sequences provided by Illumina. This extended sequence was then compared to the mouse assembled genomes using the Blastn algorithm (no filters) (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi). Orthologous regions of the mouse genome which mapped to the expected gene were identified for further analysis and suitable primers were designed to assess similar sized homologous regions in mouse and human DNA. The positions of the bisulfite sequencing PCR products relative to the transcriptional start site and the number of CpGs analyzed for both are shown. *There is no equivalent mouse transcript to the human transcript used forMEST. Supplementary Table 2. Primers used for bisulfite and real time PCR. For bisulfite PCR, primers were designed to amplify regions (200-500bp) surrounding the CpG site assessed on the Illumina GoldenGate Cancer Panel I microarray or its orthologous position in the mouse genome. Primers were designed using the program Methprimer (www.urogene.org./methprimer). The annealing temperature for all primers was 55 degrees C, cycling at this temperature was preceded by 5 cycles of 'touchdown PCR' from 60 degrees C in increments of -1 degrees C to increase the specificity of the products. The humanTRIM29PCR reactions required the addition of Betaine (Sigma-Aldrich, Gillingham, UK) to the PCR mix (final concentration 1M). For quantitative real time RT-PCR, primers were designed using Primer Express software (Applied Biosystems) to ensure that products overlapped intron/exon boundaries. Dissociation curves confirmed PCR product specificity. Expression was assessed relative to expression of a control gene (28S rRNA orTBP), using the comparative Ct method for relative quantification. Dilution series were carried out to confirm relative expression was consistent over a range of input DNA concentrations. Supplementary Figure 1. Identification of DNA methylation events associated with MBNone. A.Clustering of DNA methylation patterns in 230 primary human medulloblastomas identifies four consensus subgroups which are highly significantly related to established SHH and WNT subgroup biomarkers ('p'values are shown). The 216 tumors which could be confidently assigned to a subgroup are shownNone. MBSHH, red; Group 3, yellow; WNT, blue; Group 4, green. MBSHHbiomarker (SHH mRNA signature / GAB-1/YAP1 IHC) positivity, red. WNT subgroup biomarker (WNT mRNA signature / beta-catenin IHC) positivity, blue. Data not available, grey. Magnitudes of the four defining metagenes (V1 to V4; highly expressed metagenes, red; lowly expressed, blue) and subgroup-specific DNA methylation events (unmethylated, green; fully-methylated, red) are shown. B. Principal component analysis loadings plot shows class designations for WNT (blue), MBSHH(red), Group 3 (yellow) and Group 4 (green) tumors and normal cerebella (pink;n=21). Covariance spheroids with a 95% confidence interval have been plotted to demonstrate group memberships. Supplementary Figure 2. Identification and assessment of DNA methylation alterations in orthologous regions of the mouse and human genomes. A. Examples of regions of homology between mouse and human genomes. Aligned sequences are shown for the regions surroundingTRIM29(probe P833),CCKAR(probe E79),VAV1(probe E9) andMEST(probe P4). The probe site interrogated by the Illumina array is boxed (dashed line); other conserved CpG sites are boxed (solid line) and non- conserved CpG sites are underlined. H, human; M, mouse. B. Correlation between the array-assessed beta-value and the average methylation score determined by bisulfite sequencing for all CpG sites in the surrounding region (Table S1) for nine genomic regions, in six randomly-selected cerebella and six randomly-selected MBSHHtumors. (RASSF1A; r2, 0.92). C.Methylation levels at individual CpG sites in the assessedVav1region in mouse tumors and strain-specific cerebella following analysis by bisulfite sequencing, shown alongside the overall average methylation score for the region. CpG sites are labelled by their position relative to the translational start site of theVav1gene. Black circles, greater than =80% methylation; three-quarter black circles, greater than =60%; half-black circles, greater than =40%; quarter-black circles, greater than =20% methylation; white circles, less than 20% methylation. Supplementary Figure 3. Nonehypo-methylation in human medulloblastomas: Regional CpG patterns, molecular and clinical significance. A. Representative examples of bisulfite sequencing on the reverse strand of the region surroundingVAV1(probe E9). Assayed CpG sites (labelled by their position relative to the translational start site of theVav1gene) are underlined and calculated methylated peak height (G-green) relative to total peak height is given for each of the 10 CpG sites analyzed. The methylation score is the average of these values and is shown together with the beta value for the CpG site (boxed) assessed on the Illumina array. B.Methylation levels at individual CpG sites in the assessedVAV1region in representative human tumors (MBSHH(n=25) and non-MBSHH(n=8) tumors) and cerebella (n=7), following analysis by bisulfite sequencing and shown alongside the methylation score. Black circles, greater than =80% methylation; three-quarter black circles, greater than =60%; half-black circles, greater than =40%; quarter-black circles, greater than =20% methylation; white circles, less than 20% methylation. The CpG site assessed by probe E9 is shown, and the cut-off used to discriminateVAV1hypo-methylated tumors (0.53;Figure 3) is marked. C.Box plots showing methylation levels (beta-values) forVAV1(probe P317) in the MBSHHsubgroup (n=50) compared to non- MBSHH(n=166) tumors and cerebella (CB;n=21). The mean cerebellar methylation (-3SD; cut-off marked at 0.30) is shown to distinguish hypo-methylated tumors. Non-MBSHHtumors are shown colored by subgroup (Group 3, yellow; WNT, blue; Group 4, green). Supplementary Figure 4. Nonemethylation patterns in multiple pediatric brain tumor types. Box plots show methylation patterns for probesVAV1E9 (A) andVAV1P317 (B) for posterior fossa ependymomas (dark green,n=45); supratentorial ependymomas (light green,n=16); pediatric high-grade gliomas (grey, pHGG,n=15) and CNS-PNETs (black,n=30). For comparison, methylation status of non-neoplastic cerebellar (pink,n=21) and cerebral (dark pink,n=16) cohorts are shown (data for the 16 cerebra are previously describedNone). Horizontal cut-off lines, corresponding to the mean -3SD cerebellar methylation (probe E9, beta=0.53 and probe P317, beta=0.30) are shown for comparison withFigures 2AandS3C. 'p'values from Kruskal-Wallis tests are shown. Supplementary movies. Time lapse images documenting the morphology of CGNs following electroporation with equal amounts of vector only (Movie 1); Vav1DN (Movie 2) and Vav1CA (Movie 3).