Oxidative stress is implicated in the development and progression of many human diseases, including atherosclerosis and diabetes (1-3). One of the biochemical changes associated with oxidative damage is lipid peroxidation. The F2-isoprostanes are a series of prostaglandin-like molecules formed by non-enzymatic free radical-catalyzed oxidation of arachidonic acid (4). These compounds are produced in esterified form in tissue and enter the circulatory system in the free acid form (5). F2-isoprostanes can be detected in biological fluids, including plasma, urine and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid. One of the most abundant isoprostanesin vivo, 15(S)-8-iso-prostaglandin-F2alpha (abbreviated here as 8-iso-PGF2alpha; also known as 9alpha,11alpha-15S-trihydroxy-(8beta)-prosta-5Z,13E-dien-1-oic acid) (3,22,23), has been shown to be biologically active and a potent vasoconstrictor in the renal, pulmonary and coronary arteries (6,7). 8-iso-PGF2alpha is recognized as a reliable marker of oxidative injury and lipid peroxidationin vivo(2,4,5,8,9). High levels of 8-iso-PGF2alpha in biological fluids have been reported in subjects that smoke and consume alcohol (9,10), and in patients with diabetes (2), cardiovascular (8,11) and liver diseases (12). Many methods have been developed to isolate and quantify F2-isoprostanes and their metabolites in urine and plasma. They include gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) (13), liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) (14), GC-tandem MS (16), LC-tandem MS (17) and enzyme immunoassays (9,15). The GC-MS and LC-MS methods generally require multiple sample preparation and steps to clean up the biological matrices, which can lead to contamination, measurement of more than one isomer of 8-iso-PGF2alpha, and poor recoveries of 8-iso-PGF2alpha (13-15). For instance, sample preparation by solid-phase extraction (SPE) on C-18 followed by GC-MS analysis for 8-iso-PGF2alpha is hampered by co-eluting peaks (18). Therefore, further sample purification by thin-layer chromatography or high-performance liquid chromatography prior to GC-MS analysis of 8-iso-PGF2alpha is recommended (19,20). To improve the specificity of the sample preparation techniques, methods have been pursued that use immunoaffinity purification of biological samples using 8-iso-PGF2alpha specific antibodies bound to an inert stationary phase, followed by GC-tandem MS (16,21). These methods involve lengthy sample preparation steps, including derivatization processes that can impact the analytical recovery values. Alternatively, LC-MS and LC-tandem MS analyses of 8-iso-PGF2alpha in biological matrices generally suffer from insufficient resolution between isomers of isoprostanes, and vigorous fragmentation during collision-induced dissociation. Moreover, these procedures require high sample volume, costly technologies and well trained analysts. Conversely, immunoassays can be relatively easy to use and comparably less time consuming, and are therefore suitable for high-throughput screening of 8-iso-PGF2alpha; however, they can be limited in their reliability and specificity due to cross-reactivity depending upon the sample pretreatment techniques used (14,15). Currently used sample preparation and purification methods for immunoassays include SPE and immunoaffinity column chromatography (14-17). The aim of this study was to develop an optimal sample preparation method for the reliable assessment of free 8-iso-PGF2alpha in plasma and urine, suitable for high-throughput screening of this oxidative stress marker. The procedure consists of immunoaffinity purification (IAP) followed by clarification using molecular weight cut-off filtration (MWCO). The performance of this modified IAP method was compared with two commonly used procedures for immunoassays: Cayman's original affinity column purification, and SPE by C-18. Purified samples were then analyzed by competitive enzyme immunoassay (EIA). A 1 ug/mL solution of 8-iso-PGF2alpha was prepared in 95% ethanol from an 8-iso-PGF2alpha crystalline solid (Cayman Chemical Company, Ann Arbor, MI). A stock solution at a concentration of 50 ng/mL was made by diluting the 1 ug/mL solution with 0.15 M NaCl solution. Plasma and urine samples from five female subjects were purchased from Innovative Research Inc. (Novi, MI) and stored at -80 degrees C until analysis. Master mixes were prepared by pooling plasma or urine samples, which were used in investigations to validate analytical performance: recovery, analytical precision, linearity, accuracy, inter-analyst variation and EIA assay kit batch-to-batch variation. Urine samples were centrifuged at 9,800 rpm for 5 min to remove any particulate matter (e.g., dead cells). Aliquots (200 uL) of individual or pooled plasma or urine samples were treated separately with 20 uL of 0.3 M butylated hydroxytoluene and 20 uL of 0.1 M diethylene triamine pentaacetic acid (prepared in 100% isopropanol; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) to prevent any postmortem oxidative changes. These plasma or urine samples were used in the following experiments. Aliquots (200 uL) of pooled plasma or urine samples were spiked with various concentrations of 8-iso-PGF2alpha (0.25, 0.5, 1 and 5 ng/mL) to determine spiked recovery values. All spiked samples were prepared in triplicate. To determine the basal levels of 8-iso-PGF2alpha, unspiked plasma and urine samples were prepared by adding a volume equivalent to the spike volume of 0.15 M NaCl to the pooled aliquots (200 uL) of plasma or urine samples. Unspiked plasma or urine samples for analytical performance tests were prepared in triplicate. Sample preparation procedures and analysis of free 15(S)-8-iso-PGF2alpha by the EIA assay were conducted within 24 h.A set of aliquots of spiked or unspiked plasma samples (200 uL) were deproteinized with 375 uL of ice cold acidified acetone (acetone-1 N HCl-deionized water = 40:1:5 by volume), vortexed and centrifuged at 9,800 rpm for 10 min. Supernatants were evaporated under a gentle stream of N2to a final volume of 200 uL. Deproteinization and evaporation steps were repeated. These samples (200 uL) were treated with 200 uL of ethyl acetate, vortexed, and the upper layer was collected. This step was repeated thrice. Combined ethyl acetate layers were evaporated to dryness under a stream of N2. The plasma extracts were reconstituted with 200 uL of 0.15 M NaCl solution and mixed with 3 ug of a polyclonal goat 8-iso-PGF2alpha antibody (Oxford Biomedical Research, Oxford, MI). This antibody exhibits cross-reactivity with 9alpha, 11beta-PGF2alpha (4.1%), 13, 14-dihydro-15-keto-PGF2alpha (3%) and less than 0.01% for the other isoforms. Urine samples did not go through deproteinization or ethyl acetate extraction and were directly mixed with the polyclonal goat 8-iso-PGF2alpha antibody. All samples were incubated with gentle mixing (2 h) to allow 8-iso-PGF2alpha-antibody complex formation and were then passed through a 30 kDa MWCO filter (Ultrafree MC 30-kDa NMWL filter unit; Millipore, Billerica, MA) by centrifugation (5,000 g, 4 degrees C) for 10 min. Each filter sample was washed with 50 uL solution of 0.15 M NaCl by centrifugation (5,000 g, 4 degrees C) for 10 min and the flow-through was discarded. The 8-iso-PGF2alpha-antibody complex was treated with 95% ethanol (200 uL) and sonicated (1 min) to dissociate 8-iso-PGF2alpha. The solution was transferred to a second 30 kDa MWCO filter and centrifuged (5,000 g, 4 degrees C) for 10 min. Eluted 8-iso-PGF2alpha was evaporated, reconstituted in 200 uL of 95% ethanol and stored at -80 degrees C until analysis. The column preparation and purification protocol was performed as per manufacturer's instructions (Cayman Chemical Company). Briefly, 8-iso-PGF2alpha affinity columns were prepared by packing 0.5 mL (per sample) of an 8-isoprostane (8-iso-PGF2alpha) affinity sorbent (Cat. No. 10010365; Cayman Chemical Company) containing a mouse monoclonal anti-8-iso-PGF2alpha antibody (cross-reactivity with 8-isoprostaglandin F3alpha was 7.6%, prostaglandin F1alpha was 2.85%, and for other isoforms was less than 1%), and washed with eicosanoid affinity column buffer (Cayman Chemical Company). Spiked or unspiked biological samples were passed through the affinity columns, which were then washed with column buffer and deionized water. The 8-iso-PGF2alpha in each sample was eluted with 2 mL of elution solution (95% ethanol; Cayman Chemical Company), evaporated to dryness under a stream of N2, reconstituted in elution solution (200 uL), and stored at -80 degrees C until analysis. Aliquots of spiked or unspiked urine or plasma samples (200 uL) were applied to a SPE-C-18 column (Sep-Pak cartridge; Waters Associates, Milford, MA), which had been previously primed with 1 mL methanol and washed with 2 mL deionized water. Air (2 mL) was then displaced through the column, which was followed by a 1 mL deionized water wash. The 8-iso-PGF2alpha was slowly eluted with 3 mL of methanol, collected into an amber glass vial and evaporated to dryness under a stream of N2. Dried samples were reconstituted in 200 uL of 95% ethanol and stored at -80 degrees C until analysis. Aliquots from each sample were evaporated, reconstituted in EIA buffer at a dilution of 1:10 (for the experiments with spiking concentrations of 0.25, 0.5 and 1 ng/mL) or 1:25 (for the experiments with a spiking concentration of 5 ng/mL) to fit within the mid-range of the EIA standard curve, and plated in duplicate according to the manufacturer's protocol for the 8-isoprostane EIA assay (Cayman Chemical Company). The plate was developed for 60 min (B0ranged from 0.5 to 0.8 AU) and absorbance measurements were made at a wavelength of 405 nm using a SpectraMax Plus microplate reader (Molecular Devices, Sunnyvale, CA). The 15(S)-8-iso-PGF2alpha antibody used in the EIA kit measures the free form of 8-iso-PGF2alpha and exhibits cross-reactivity with 8-isoprostaglandin F3alpha, (20.6%), 2,3-dinor-8-isoprostaglandin F2alpha (4%), 8-isoprostaglandin E2 (1.84%), 2,3-dinor-8-isoprostaglandin F1alpha (1.7%) and 8-isoprostaglandin E1 (1.56%), and smaller than 1% for other isoforms. Creatinine concentration in urine samples was measured on the COBAS (Roche, Mannheim, Germany) instrument following the CREA Jaffe method (27). Initially, the EIA assay performance was validated by analysis of 8-iso-PGF2alpha standards at concentration levels from 0.8 to 500pg/mL (eight-point calibration). Intra-assay and inter-assay analytical variation values were calculated by the assessment of replicates within one assay and multiple assays, respectively. Analytical performance of all three sample preparation methods (Procedures I-III) were assessed by the analysis of unspiked and spiked (5 ng/mL) plasma and urine samples purified by these methods, and by determination of corresponding spiked recovery values and reproducibility values. The spiked recovery of 8-iso-PGF2alpha in percentage was calculated using the following equation: [(X1-B)/X0] * 100, where the 8-iso-PGF2alpha amount measured in unspiked and spiked samples are denoted byBandX1, respectively, whereas the actual amount of 8-iso-PGF2alpha used to spike isX0. For the IAP method, further method performance verification tests were conducted. Extended analysis of recovery values was conducted by spiking 200 uL aliquots of pooled urine or plasma samples over a range of 8-iso-PGF2alpha concentrations (0.25, 0.5, 1 and 5 ng/mL), followed by analysis using the IAP-EIA method. In addition, pooled plasma or urine samples purified by IAP were post-spiked with 0.8, 2, 12.8, 32, 200 and 500 pg/mL concentrations of 8-iso-PGF2alpha and calibration curves were constructed to determiner2values (N= 3 for each concentration). Pooled plasma and urine aliquots clarified by the IAP method were spiked with 8-iso-PGF2alpha at levels of 5 and 80 pg/mL, which were not used in the construction of the calibration curve, and analyzed to determine the accuracy of the IAP-EIA method. Additional plasma and urine samples were analyzed for 8-iso-PGF2alpha levels using the optimized IAP-EIA method in triplicate by two analysts to test inter-analyst variation. Furthermore, three different batches of assay kits were tested to determine the impact of Cayman EIA assay kit batch-to-batch variation on the overall IAP-EIA method. Aliquots (200 uL) of plasma or urine samples from five healthy individuals (commercially obtained from Innovative Research, Inc.) were analyzed using the IAP-EIA method. Each sample was analyzed in triplicate. Oxidative stress has been implicated in several pathologies and high risk physiologies, such as cardiovascular, pulmonary and neurological disorders. Biochemical changes associated with oxidative stress can be followed by an assessment of oxidative modification of proteins, lipids and DNA. Measurement of 8-iso-PGF2alpha is one way to investigate oxidative modification of lipids. This molecule is considered to be formed as the result of a reaction between arachidonic moiety of membrane phospholipids and free radicals such as superoxide anion (28). Although there are several reports on the measurement of free 8-iso-PGF2alpha in biological fluids, they are labor intensive or costly, and thus are not compatible with high-throughput screening of large number of biological matrices. The purpose of developing this new IAP method was to offer a valid alternative to other purification methods available for 8-iso-PGF2alpha analysis in plasma and urine samples. Initially, the Cayman EIA assay was validated. The detection limit of the EIA assay was 0.8 pg/mL. The practical quantitation limit was 4 pg/mL. Linear performance of the assay wasr2= 0.98 in the range of 0.8-500 pg/mL. The intra-assay and inter-assay coefficients of variation were 4.9 and 13.4%, respectively. Results from the three sample purification procedures used in this work were then compared for 8-iso-PGF2alpha recovery following the analysis of spiked (5 ng/mL) and unspiked plasma and urine samples (Table I). Analysis of 8-iso-PGF2alpha following the IAP method (Procedure I) was associated with analytical precision values (+/-5%)and yielded the best spiked recovery values for plasma (99.8%). For urine sample analysis, the analytical precision value was +/-15% and spiked recovery was 54.1%. The Cayman affinity purification method (Procedure II) and the SPE-C18 method (Procedure III) overestimated the amount of 8-iso-PGF2alpha both in plasma and urine, as revealed by the spiked recovery values, which were generally greater than 120% (Table I). This can be attributed to experimental artefacts caused by cross-reactivity due to other co-contaminants such as isoforms of 8-iso-PGF2alpha (22). The unspiked plasma 8-iso-PGF2alpha level associated with Procedure III is in the same order of magnitude as the levels reported by Vassalleet al. (8), using the same procedure. NoneNoneNoneNoneComparison of Analytical Performance of Three Sample Preparation Methods Used in the Analysis of 8-iso-PGF2alpha in Human Plasma and Urine**Note: Results are presented as mean +/- SD,n= 3. NoneAmount of 8-iso-PGF2alpha used to spike (X0) = 5,000 pg/mL. NoneConcentration in the spike = Measured amount in spiked samples (X1) - Measured amount in unspiked samples (B); Spiked recovery = (Concentration in the spike/Actual amount used to spike) * 100 = [(X1-B)/X0] * 100. In all experiments, plasma and urine samples were treated with antioxidants to prevent postmortem oxidative changes during sample handling that could contribute to experimental artefacts. Pre-clean-up such as deproteinization and the choice of an antibody with comparably less cross-reactivity with the other isoforms of 8-iso-PGF2alpha could have led to a better performance of the IAP method. However, the results revealed that the inclusion of a deproteinization step in the urine sample preparation procedure did not improve spiked recovery values, and thus a deproteinization step was not included in urine sample preparations. Deproteinization for urine matrix may not have significantly altered the recovery values because urine contains comparably less protein than the plasma matrix. Also, extraction of the urine samples with ethyl acetate did not improve the recovery of 8-iso-PGF2alpha and was therefore not further pursued. Although urinary 8-iso-PGF2alpha analysis by IAP was associated with lower spiked recovery values, it was consistent through repeated analyses (Tables IandII). NoneNoneNoneNonePercent Recoveries for a Range of Spiked Concentrations of 8-iso-PGF2alpha in Plasma and Urine Samples Using the Optimized IAP-EIA Method**Note: Results are presented as mean +/- SD,n= 3. NoneConcentration in the spike = Measured amount in spiked samples (X1) - Measured amount in unspiked samples (B);Bfor plasma = 34 +/- 1.5 pg/mL, urine = 83 +/- 11 pg/mL. NoneSpiked recovery = (Concentration in the spike/Actual amount used to spike) * 100 = [(X1-B)/X0] * 100. Extended analytical validation tests were conducted for the IAP-EIA method to assess the robustness of this method. Recovery values over a range of spiked concentrations (0.25, 0.5, 1 and 5 ng/mL) of 8-iso-PGF2alpha were determined for both plasma and urine matrices (Table II). Mean recovery values for 8-iso-PGF2alpha in plasma and urine were 90.5 +/- 8% and 52.6 +/- 1.5%, respectively, and were independent of 8-iso-PGF2alpha levels in these biological matrices. The calibration curve [EIA response expressed as logit(B/Bo) versus concentration expressed as pg/mL, whereBis the sample bound andBois the maximum binding of tracer] for the plasma matrix exhibited a correlation coefficient ofr2= 0.993, a slope of -0.9091 and an intercept of 2.4027. For the urine matrix,r2= 0.978, and the slope was -0.6451 and intercept was 1.1859. Accuracy values associated with this method for 8-iso-PGF2alpha levels of 5 and 80 pg/mL in plasma matrix were 86 +/- 14% and 84 +/- 7%, respectively, and 73 +/- 8% and 77 +/- 7%, respectively, for the urine matrix. The inter-analyst variation based on the results from triplicate analysis of the pooled samples by two analysts was determined at less than +/-10% for plasma and +/-27% for urine. Similarly, three different batches of EIA assay kits were tested in triplicate and the assay kit batch-to-batch variation was less than +/-14% for plasma and +/-30% for urine. The IAP method was then used to analyze commercially obtained human (female) plasma and urine samples for 8-iso-PGF2alpha (Table III). The mean basal plasma levels of 8-iso-PGF2alpha were determined to be 31.8 +/- 5.5 pg/mL [mean +/- standard deviation (SD)]. Interestingly, this value is in line with the values (ranging from 35 to 42 pg/mL) reported by Milneet al. (23) and Ohashiet al. (24) using LC-ESI-MS and GC-MS analyses. This study's results indicated that urine 8-iso-PGF2alpha levels exhibited more biological variability between individuals, ranging from 0.72 to 5.92 ng/mg of creatinine with a mean value of 2.9 +/- 2.0 ng/mg creatinine (Table III). This is within the range of previously reported concentrations of 8-iso-PGF2alpha in urine from healthy human volunteers determined by mass spectrometric methods (GC-MS, LC-MS and LC-MS-MS), which were 0.22 to 10.6 ng/mg creatinine (2,22-26) (Table III). Therefore, urine 8-iso-PGF2alpha levels determined by the IAP-EIA method are in line with the values reported in the literature. Devarajet al. (2) assessed this analyte using a GC-MS method and observed a larger variation in urinary 8-iso-PGF2alpha levels between subjects compared to plasma levels. In addition, the larger inter-individual variation observed with 8-iso-PGF2alpha levels in urine compared to plasma is reflected by the reported values in Table III. Increased biological variability associated with 8-iso-PGF2alpha levels in urine can probably be affected by diets of individuals (26). Diets rich in antioxidants by consumption of fruits and vegetables have been reported by Thompsonet al. (26) to be associated with a reduction in urinary concentration of 8-iso-PGF2alpha. NoneNoneNoneUnspiked (Basal) Levels of 8-iso-PGF2alpha Concentration in Human Plasma and Urine SamplesThe IAP method reported here employed only 200 uL of a plasma or urine sample. By comparison, GC-based and LC-based analyses of healthy human plasma and urine levels for 8-iso-PGF2alpha usually require sample volumes of 1 to 5 mL (22,30). This can probably be accounted for by the sensitivity of detection associated with these different types of detection methods and sample preparation procedures that can negatively impact recovery values (22,24,30). The specificity of the IAP-EIA method, offered by using an antibody against 8-iso-PGF2alpha, minimizes clean-up steps, which can be advantageous over other methods employing extensive sample manipulations, thus resulting in comparably fewer experimental artefacts. Typical sample preparation methods used in the analysis of 8-iso-PGF2alpha have been reported to involve anywhere between 6 h and 2 days (18,29,30). For the IAP method reported here, the time taken for purification of a batch of 36 samples is approximately 6 h. The time has been estimated to be greater than = 20 h for the analysis of 8-iso-PGF2alpha by GC-MS or LC-MS-MS methods (instrument preparation, blanks and standard runs and data analysis;N= 36 samples), based on the information provided in the literature (18,29,30). For similar analysis by the EIA method, the time involved is approximately 19 h. Therefore, the time for sample preparation and analysis of 8-iso-PGF2alpha by the IAP-EIA method is either less or comparable to previously reported methods for sample preparation. Meanwhile, the cost associated with the IAP-EIA method for 8-iso-PGF2alpha analysis is approximately one third of that associated with GC-MS or LC-MS-MS methods. Additionally, the GC-MS or LC-MS-MS methods of analysis require specialized personnel, whereas the IAP-EIA method does not. Furthermore, the IAP-EIA method reported here is also amenable to automation. In conclusion, the IAP-EIA method is a valid alternative method for 8-iso-PGF2alpha purification and exhibits good analytical performance for 8-iso-PGF2alpha analysis in both plasma and urine matrices. The IAP-EIA method is simple, sensitive, less costly and requires smaller sample volume than other reported methods, and is therefore amenable to high-throughput screening of large number of samples for 8-iso-PGF2alpha in biological matrices.