Gammaretroviral vectors were the first viral gene-therapy vectors to enter clinical trials and remain in use today. NoneOne potential hazard associated with the use of such vectors is the presence of replication-competent retroviruses ("RCR") in the vector preparations, either as a result of recombination events between the plasmids used for vector production or between the plasmids and endogenous retroviral sequences in the packaging cell lines, or as a result of contamination in the laboratory. None-NoneRCR are potentially pathogenic, and have in fact been shown to induce malignancy in mice and non-human primates. None,NoneTherefore, it is critical that vector preparations be rigorously tested to exclude the presence of RCR, and the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) requires that all vector preparations be screened for RCR. NoneAt present, the FDA recommends inoculating an aliquot of each vector preparation into a permissive cell line and passaging the cells for at least three weeks ("amplification phase"). Cell-free media from the amplification phase can then be analyzed by a variety of methods, including S+L- and marker-rescue assays, to demonstrate the presence or absence of RCR (reviewed in Cornetta and WilsonNone; for a description of the S+L- assay, see Bassinet. al. None). We now describe a new method for the detection of RCR in gammaretrovirus-based gene-therapy products and the cell lines used to make them. The assay uses one of a series of DERSE (Detector of Exogenous Retroviral Sequence Elements) plasmids, stably maintained in a cell line permissive for the retrovirus of interest. None,NoneUtilizing the unique reverse-transcription step of the retroviral infection cycle, a functional reporter gene is formed in the DERSE cell culture only after infection with an RCR. The DERSE assay can be constructed, potentially, to detect any RCR and can use any reporter gene. In this report, we describe the inGluc-MLV-DERSE assay, using a 293T cell line that expresses the receptor for ecotropic MLVs (murine cationic amino acid transporter, mCAT1), andGaussiaLuciferase (Gluc) as the reporter gene. None-NoneWe use the inGluc-MLV-DERSE assay to detect three gammaretroviruses commonly used in construction of gene-therapy products: Moloney MLV (MoMLV); 4070A amphotropic MLV (4070A); and Gibbon Ape Leukemia Virus (GALV). Measurement of Glucactivity in the cell culture supernatant, or the Glucgene in MLV-DERSE cell genomic DNA, indicates the presence of RCR in the test sample. The high enzymatic activity of Glucand the requirement for RCR infection for Glucexpression result in an assay with a very high (104) signal:background ratio. The fact that Glucis secreted from the cell means that a single infected culture can be periodically sampled over time without the need to harvest cells. Most appealingly, the inGluc-MLV-DERSE assay does not require specialized training to perform and compares well to current protocols used for RCR detection. In experiments not shown here, we have also obtained comparable results with other reporters, including GFP. The DERSE plasmids use a strategy that was originally devised for detection of retrotransposition by retroelements. None-NoneThese plasmids consist of a retroviral genome with an intron-containing indicator sequence replacing the viral coding regions (Figure 1). NoneThe viral sequences retained in the plasmid provide all the functions necessary for viral replication and expression (except those functions that are provided by viral proteins). Importantly, the indicator sequence is oriented in a reverse direction relative to the viral sequences while the intron is oriented in a forward direction. In the absence of an RCR the cell transcribes the indicator sequence, using the viral sequences as a promoter, and removes the intron. The result is a minus-strand (non-coding) copy of the indicator RNA, flanked by viralcis-acting sequences that include the viral RNA packaging signal. If this cell is infected with an RCR, the minus-strand indicator sequence can be packaged by viral proteins encoded by the RCR. When this RCR goes on to infect a new cell, reverse transcription of the viral RNA (that now includes the minus-strand indicator sequence) results in a coding indicator gene that is subsequently integrated into, and expressed by, the newly infected cell. Here we describe the inGluc-MLV-DERSE cell line in which the indicator gene is the secretedGaussialuciferase (Gluc) enzyme, the LTRs and othercisacting sequences are from MLV, and the host cell line is 293mCAT1. Glucactivity is measured by addition of coelenterazine to a small volume (10uL) of cell culture supernatant, followed by measurement of light output. We initially tested the inGluc-MLV-DERSE cell line in several ways. Firstly, we were interested in the ability of the cell line to detect RCR produced from a chronically infected cell line. To assess this we co-cultured the inGluc-MLV-DERSE cells with NIH-3T3 cells chronically infected with Moloney MLV (MoMLV). We observed a ~3-log increase in Glucactivity in the cell culture supernatant 3 days after the two cell lines were mixed, indicating that the MoMLV originating from the NIH-3T3 cells had infected and replicated in the inGluc-MLV-DERSE cells, resulting in expression of Gluc(Figure 2a). We next investigated the relationship between the amount of virus present at the time of infection and the Glucactivity measured in the supernatant several days after infection. We infected the inGluc-MLV-DERSE cells with 10-fold serial dilutions of MoMLV and measured Glucactivity in the supernatant 4, 5 and 6 days after infection (Figure 2b). We found the Glucactivity level in the culture supernatant increased monotonically with the concentration of MoMLV used for infection. Further, we could follow the spread of MoMLV through the culture as periodic sampling of the culture supernatant demonstrated accumulation of Glucactivity over time. The dilution end-point for this assay was between 10-4and 10-5(Figure 2b); this result is in excellent agreement with the titer of this virus stock obtained by the direct S+L- focus assayNone(data not shown; see Figure legend for details.). Finally, as Glucis a secreted protein, we thought it interesting to see whether the Glucassay could be conducted directly in the cell culture plate. We tested this by infecting the inGluc-MLV-DERSE cells with MoMLV in a black 96-well plate and then adding Glucsubstrate directly to the cell culture well 3 days after infection (Figure 2c). The MoMLV-infected culture showed Glucactivity of ~107counts per second (cps), the maximum activity measurable using our instrument, while a mock-infected culture had a background of ~103cps. Thus it is possible to infect and detect RCR in the same plate. The ability to conduct the assay in this way may simplify automation of the assay and could have applications outside of gene-therapy product testing. We found measurement of Glucactivity in the supernatant to be a rapid and simple method for detecting infection of the inGluc-MLV-DERSE cell line. However, since infection of the cell line with a RCR results in the generation of a new gene (the spliced Glucgene), it is also possible to use PCR as a read-out for the assay by targeting a primer/probe specifically to the coding Glucsequences that flank the intron. We developed a duplex real-time PCR assay that simultaneously amplified the functional Glucgene and, as a control for DNA quality and quantity, the single-copy CCR5 gene. Using this PCR, only the spliced, functional Glucgene can be amplified (and thus amplification from the Glucprimer/probe set can only occur following RCR infection of the inGluc-MLV-DERSE cell line). Using a plasmid standard, we determined that the real-time PCR could detect 10 - 33 copies of Glucin 100ng of inGluc-MLV-DERSE cell DNA (data not shown). To test the duplex real time PCR assay, we extracted genomic DNA from inGluc-MLV-DERSE cells 3 days after they were infected with serial dilutions of MoMLV. We performed duplex real-time PCR on the DNA and measured Glucactivity in the supernatant (Figure 3a, b, c and d). The Glucprobe Ct value was inversely related to the MoMLV concentration used for infection (Figure 3a and c). Further, the Glucprobe Ct values and the Glucactivity in the supernatant were in complete concordance - a culture deemed Glucpositive or negative in the duplex real-time PCR assay gave the same result in the Glucactivity assay (Figure 3a and d). As expected, CCR5 was amplified in all cases, confirming that the absence of Glucprobe fluorescence was not due to an absence, or poor quality, of DNA (Figure 3b). In a separate experiment, we infected the inGluc-MLV-DERSE cells with MoMLV and the day after infection performed real-time PCR on the cellular DNA and a Glucactivity assay on the supernatant (results not shown). In this case, we found that the Glucgene was amplified by real-time PCR but Glucactivity was not detected in the supernatant, presumably because Glucprotein levels had not accumulated sufficiently. This suggests that the real-time PCR can detect infection of the inGluc-MLV-DERSE cell line marginally earlier than measurement of Glucactivity in the supernatant. However, the extra time and manipulations (which could increase the risk of contamination) required to extract DNA and perform the real-time PCR, as well as the fact that the experiment is terminated once DNA is collected, may make the Glucactivity more suitable for many purposes. To support the results from the inGluc-MLV-DERSE assay, we compared the assay with two established methods for detecting retrovirus - the reverse transcriptase (RT) assay and immunoblotting against viral proteins. We infected the inGluc-MLV-DERSE cells with serial dilutions of 4070A amphotropic MLV, grew the cells, and collected the supernatant for Glucactivity assay, RT assay or immunoblot (Figure 4a, b and c). Within 16 days of the initial infection, we observed that all cultures infected with the 10-5dilution of 4070A and none of the cultures infected with the 10-6dilution of 4070A had Glucactivity in the supernatant, making 10-5the dilution end-point for this particular virus stock using this assay (Figure 4a). This result is in reasonable agreement with the results of the standard, extended S+L--based assayNone, which gave a titer of 106infectious units/ml for the inoculum (data not shown). Glucactivity was first detected in the cultures infected with the 10-5dilution 6 days after infection (Figure 4a). We next measured RT activity in the supernatant collected during growth of the 4070A-infected inGluc-MLV-DERSE cells. Using this particular RT activity assay, we first detected RT activity in supernatant collected 13 days after infection of the inGluc-MLV-DERSE cells with a 10-5dilution of 4070A (Figure 4b). RT activity was not detected in supernatant from cells infected with a 10-6dilution of 4070A, even at 16 days after infection. While the Glucactivity assay proved to be more rapid than the RT assay under these experimental conditions, both assays gave the same dilution endpoint for this 4070A stock in this experiment (Figure 4a and b). Additionally, we used a broadly reactive antiserum to MLV p30CAin an immunoblot of virus pellets prepared from the supernatants of the 4070A-infected cultures (Figure 4c). Supernatant p30CAlevels, as estimated by immunoblot, were proportional to Glucactivity (Figure 4a and c). Under the conditions used, the Glucactivity assay was more sensitive than the immunoblot for RCR detection. Thus, while supernatant from the culture infected with a 10-5dilution of 4070A demonstrated Glucactivity 6 days after infection, p30CAwas not observed in the supernatant until 12 days after infection (Figure 4a and c). Again, both assays gave the same endpoint for this 4070A stock, as p30CAwas not observed in supernatants collected from cells infected with a 10-6dilution of 4070A. To determine the usefulness of the inGluc-MLV-DERSE assay for testing gene-therapy products, we used a single GALV stock and compared Glucactivity assay results from infection of the inGluc-MLV-DERSE line (conducted at NCI) with an extended S+L- assay conducted at the Indiana University Vector Production Facility. NoneUsing the S+L- assay, the GALV stock was found to contain 105tissue culture-infectious doses (TCID50) per ml (not shown). We infected the inGluc-MLV-DERSE cells with 10-fold dilutions of the virus, in triplicate, and then passaged the cells and monitored Glucactivity in the cell culture supernatant. Twelve days (and 3 cell passages) after infection, 3/3 of the cultures infected with a 10-5dilution of GALV and 1/3 of the cultures infected with a 10-6dilution of GALV showed maximum Glucactivity in the supernatant (Figure 5). Using identical infection conditions, we repeated this experiment twice (that is, with 2 different GALV dilution series): in the second and third experiments 3/3 of the cultures infected with a 10-5of GALV were positive and 0/3 of the 10-6infected cultures (results not shown). Thus, the results from the inGluc-MLV-DERSE assay are in excellent agreement with those from the S+L- assay. Finally, using the same GALV stock, we investigated the sensitivity of the inGluc-MLV-DERSE assay when infecting with an RCR in the presence of excess replication-incompetent retroviruses, as might be the situation when testing gene-therapy products. High concentrations of vector at the time of infection have been observed to interfere with detection of RCR, likely due to competition for cellular entry receptors. None,NoneTo determine the effect of excess vector on our assay, we infected 1.25*105inGluc-MLV-DERSE cells with serial dilutions of GALV. The dilutions were made either in media or in 7.6 * 106infectious units of a GALV-based gene-therapy vector shown to be RCR-negative using an FDA-compliant extended S+L- assay. As expected, in multiple experiments, no RCR were detected in the vector preparation by the inGluc-MLV-DERSE assay. However, we did observe somewhat lower Glucactivity in cell cultures infected with GALV in the presence of vector, compared to cultures infected with GALV alone. This observation was most notable in cultures infected with the 10-5dilution of GALV (Figure 6a and b). Importantly though, the rate at which GALV infection proceeded through the culture was the same regardless of the presence or absence of gene-therapy vector (Figure 6a). As there was no effect of excess gene-therapy vector on the kinetics of RCR spread through the culture, the reduction in Glucactivity in samples assayed soon after infection was a result of interference by the vector at the time of virus attachment to the cell, and not interference of the vector at a later stage in the retroviral cycle. Most importantly, however, within the resolution of our assay, the dilution end-point for the GALV stock was the same (i.e. 10-5) both in the presence and absence of gene-therapy vector (Figure 6b); as inFigure 5, this result also agreed with the titer of the GALV preparation previously determined by passaging on S+L- cells (data not shown). While advances in gene-therapy vector preparation have reduced the risks of RCR formation during gene-therapy vector production, screening of these products remains essential. Screening for RCR in both gammaretrovirus- and lentivirus-based vectors is a time-consuming and meticulous process. In particular, the S+L- assay used for screening gammaretrovirus based vectors requires counting of RCR-induced foci in a cell monolayer. This is a tedious and somewhat subjective measurement. Furthermore, the FDA-compliant biologic assays are generally a two-stage process, with vector product (or co-culture when testing cell lines and patient cells) being first passaged on a permissive cell line for 3 weeks (to amplify any RCR) prior to conducting a 4-6 day S+L- assay or a marker rescue assay (RCR detection). The inGluc-MLV-DERSE assay described here does not require the identification of foci, a substantial improvement on the S+L- assay. Further, the DERSE assay combines the amplification and detection stages for relatively rapid, real-time monitoring of RCR infection of the inGluc-MLV-DERSE cell culture. We show here the assay sensitively detects RCR in supernatant and produces results that are comparable to other RCR detection techniques (Figure 4and5). Moreover, the inGluc-MLV-DERSE assay is capable of directly detecting RCR by simple cocultivation with a producer cell line (Figure 2a). Thus it should be useful for screening both gene-therapy products and the packaging cell lines used for vector production (though the latter were not investigated here). What makes the DERSE assay unique, however, is that the indicator gene (or protein) is only formed if the inGluc-MLV-DERSE cells are infected with RCR. This should result in a high signal: background ratio, with resulting enhancement of detection sensitivity, regardless of the indicator gene used. Furthermore, as far as we know, any replication-competent gammaretrovirus would register in this assay. Thus, in addition to applications in gene-therapy product testing, the generic DERSE assay will undoubtedly have multiple applications for basic RCR research. In this work, we choseGaussialuciferase as our indicator gene as it has two advantages over other reporter proteins. Firstly, Glucis a predominantly secreted protein and thus there is no need for cell lysis, as is required for assays of firefly luciferase. In fact, since Glucis secreted from the cell, the Glucactivity assay can be conducted directly in the cell culture plate (Figure 2c). Secondly, this highly active enzyme can produce luminescent signal intensities of at least 107counts per second, a signal ~104times greater than the background of our assay. The combination of these two properties of the Glucenzyme means that, potentially, this particular DERSE assay could become fully automated rather simply (again, with possible applications outside of gene-therapy product testing). For gamma-RCR detection, we chose to maintain the inGluc-MLV-DERSE vector in mCAT1-expressing 293T cells (293mCAT1 cells). We show here that these cells are sufficient for infection and rapid amplification of gamma-RCR that are commonly used with vectors for gene delivery, namely GALV, MoMLV and 4070A. Additionally, we have used the inGluc-MLV-DERSE 293mCAT1 cell line to detect several other gammaretroviruses including members of the xenotropic MLV family. NoneWhile we did not compare the infectability of these cells against other cells used with GALV, MoMLV or 4070A, previous work has demonstrated that 293 cells are most suitable for GALV amplification. NoneWe would expect the 293mCAT1 cells used here to be equally suitable for GALV amplification when compared to 293 cells. WhileMus Dunnicells are currently recommended for amplification of MLV-based vectors, we did not investigate an inGluc-MLV-DERSE assay in these cells. NoneIt may well be thatMus Dunnicells offer enhanced virus amplification when assessing MLV-based vectors; it is important to note that the indicator plasmid can be maintained in any cell line deemed optimal for growth and detection of a particular retrovirus. We used several cell densities and flask/plate sizes while developing this assay, eventually settling on the use of 6-well plates as these provided us with ample cells for DNA extraction and supernatant for RT assay or immunoblot, without using large amounts of space or reagents. While such a small plate size is likely not compatible with the requirement to test 5% of the final gene-therapy product volume, it should be sufficient for research purposes. In setting these parameters, it is crucial to remember that infection by gammaretroviruses requires that the host cell be dividing, while relatively high cell densities are optimal for virus spread. None,NoneIn general, we found that passaging the cells such that they were confluent in 3-4 days provided a good environment for rapid RCR amplification. Using the standardized 6-well plate assay, we observed that inGluc-MLV-DERSE cells initially infected with a few virus particles had detectable Glucactivity in the culture supernatant 6 - 7 days after infection and became completely infected 10 - 14 days after infection (Figure 4and5). While vigilant RCR detection may still benefit from a 3-week amplification stage (to ensure detection of low numbers or slowly replicating RCR), the inGluc-MLV-DERSE assay remains a more rapid method for detecting small quantities of virus than the currently used two-stage protocols as it combines the amplification and detection steps. Similar to previous reports, we found that the presence of excess gene-therapy vector interferes somewhat with the initial amplification of RCR (Figure 6). None,NoneAs expected, this was most clearly observed at the limiting dilution (10-5) of GALV where the ratio of RCR: vector is lowest. However, at least for this combination of RCR and vector, the vector did not detectably affect the titer of GALV obtained in the inGlucassay. Thus, the data indicate that the effect of vector is minimal, and is presumably similar to the decrease in sensitivity observed in the extended S+L- assay. It can easily be imagined that an RCR would be partially replication-defective, and would replicate too slowly to be detected by the new assay. However, the results indicate that the inGlucsignal appears very rapidly (seeFig. 4and6A), so that efficiently replicating viruses are detected well before the 3 weeks required by the FDA. It seems likely that inefficiently replicating viruses will be detected sooner by the new assay than by standard assays. In fact, we have shown that the inGLucassay could detect MLVs produced by the VCaP and EKVX tumor cell linesNone, although these MLVs had very poor infectivity. None,NoneIt is also conceivable that the efficient packaging of the inGlucgenome might competitively inhibit the spread of an RCR in the indicator cells; in this case, modulation of its expression level and/or its packaging signal might further enhance the sensitivity of the assay. Yet another advantage of the DERSE assay is that a generic PCR, targeted to the indicator gene rather than the RCR itself, can be used to detect RCR (Fig. 3). Thus, unlike traditional PCR-based assays for RCR detection, PCR directed towards the Glucgene is a functional assay, as it will only be positive in the presence of an RCR. Further, the PCR overcomes the requirement for virus-specific primer and probe design: any RCR capable of rescuing the inGlucvector, regardless of its viral origin or the recombination event(s) that generated it, will result in the production of a functional Glucgene. Importantly, the assay concept presented here is highly versatile and can be extended for detection of, potentially, any RCR simply by replacing the MLV non-coding regions with those of the retrovirus of interest. We have previously reported on DERSE plasmids comprising inGlucor inlucin the context of HTLV non-coding sequence. None,NoneOf particular interest to the gene-therapy community, HIV-DERSE plasmids containing HIV genomic sequences in place of the MLV sequences described here, should allow detection of RCR (sometimes called "RCL") in lentivirus-based gene-therapy vectors. NoneFurthermore, the indicator gene can be replaced with any gene of interest allowing a researcher to customize the assay read-out to suit available equipment. We have successfully detected gamma-RCR infection of an inGFP-MLV-DERSE/LnCaP cell culture by using either FACS analysis or fluorescence microscopy to measure the appearance of GFP-positive cells following RCR infection (not shown). Here again, the fact that GFP is expressed only after RCR infection of the inGFP-MLV-DERSE cell line offers the possibility of a large signal: background ratio, particularly in comparison to other fluorescence-based RCR detection techniques that rely on enhancement, rather than initiation, of GFP expression. NoneObservation of GFP-positive cells using fluorescence microscopy may represent a very simple method for RCR detection. The inGluc-MLV-DERSE assay is a rapid and sensitive method for detection of RCR. End-point dilution experiments using the inGluc-MLV-DERSE assay gave results that were consistent with established retroviral detection methods (RT assay, immunoblot, extended S+L- assay). The presence of a great excess of gene-therapy vector did not change the limit of RCR detection at the resolution used (10-fold RCR dilutions). Further, the assay gave reproducible results over multiple experiments. While further assay development would be required to implement this method into the FDA guidelines, the work presented here demonstrates the potential of this assay for RCR detection in gene-therapy products. Future work may involve development of similar assays for lentiviral vectors. In conclusion, the DERSE assay is a versatile method for detecting RCR which should be useful not only for the gene-therapy community but for any researcher studying or working with RCR. The inGIuccassette was inserted as a SmaI to Acc65 fragment into the pBabe-puro retroviral vector between the BsrGI and the blunt-ended SalI sites. NoneThe inGluccassette consists of the CMV immediately early promoter, the human codon-optimizedGaussialuciferase coding sequences interrupted by the second intron of the rabbit beta-globingene at position 144, and the SV40 polyA signal. None293mCAT1 cells were seeded at 1*106cells/10cm plate in DMEM containing 10% fetal calf serum, 100 Units/mL penicillin, 100ug/mL streptomycin and 0.292 mg/mL glutamine (DM). The following day cells were transfected with 10ug of the inGluc-MLV-DERSE plasmid using Transit 293 from Mirus Bio LLC (Madison, WI), according to the manufacturer's instructions. The inGluc-MLV-DERSE plasmid contains the pac gene conferring puromycin resistance. Stable transfectants were selected in 5ug/mL puromycin and were subsequently maintained in 1ug/mL puromycin (DM-Puro). The BioLuxTM Gaussia Luciferase Flex Assay Kit from New England Biolabs (Ipswich, MA) was used to assay for Glucactivity. Coelenterazine was prepared according to the manufacturer's instructions. The stabilizer reagent was not used. AsGaussialuciferase is a secreted protein, 10uL of cell culture supernatant was assayed (with 50uL of coelenterazine reagent). Light output was measured in a microbeta Trilux luminescence and liquid scintillation counter for 1 second per sample. MoMLV was obtained from 0.45um filtered culture supernatant from a chronically infected NIH 3T3 cell line,Noneand the titer of this virus preparation was determined by direct S+L- focus assay. None4070A MLV was purchased from the American Type Culture Collection (#VR-1445) and was titered as described. NoneGALV SEATO virus was a kind gift from Mary Beth Eiden, NIH, and its titer was measured by the S+L- assay as described;Nonethis assay was initiated by addition of 1 ml of the virus preparation to 1 * 106293 cells. Clinical grade retroviral vector expressing the Fanconi A gene and pseudotyped with the GALVEnvwas produced by the Indiana University Vector Production Facility. The vector stock had previously screened negative for RCR using the extended S+L- assay according to current FDA requirements for clinical products. The vector titer was determined by quantitative PCR using the methods previously describedNonewith the following probe and primer set: Forward: 5'-CGC AAC CCT GGG AGA CGT CCC-3', Reverse: 5'-CGT CTC CTA CCA GAA CCA CAT ATC C-3'; Probe: 5'-FAM-CCG TTT TTG TGG CCC GAC CTG AGG-TAMRA-3'. inGluc-MLV-DERSE cells were seeded one day prior to infection. On the day of infection the cells were treated with 20ug/mL DEAE-Dextran for 30 minutes. DEAE-Dextran was removed and cells were rinsed twice with growth medium. Virus and POLYBRENE(r)(8ug/mL final concentration) were added to cells and the cultures incubated for 4 hours. Virus was replaced with DM-Puro. Experiment-specific cell quantities and volumes are given below. inGluc-MLV-DERSE cells were seeded at 1250 cells/well/100uL in DM-Puro, in a black uclear, Advanced TC, 96-well plate from Greiner Bio-one (Frickenhausen, Germany). 30uL of DEAE-Dextran and MoMLV were used and virus was replaced with 50uL DM-Puro. 3 days after infection, 100uL of coelenterazine reagent was added to each well. inGluc-MLV-DERSE cells and NIH-3T3 cells chronically infected with MoMLV were seeded at 1250 cells (each) per well of a 96-well plate. No DEAE-dextran treatment, POLYBRENE(r), or puromycin were used. inGluc-MLV-DERSE cells were seeded at 1.25*105cells/well/2mL in a 6-well plate. 1mL of DEAE-Dextran and virus were used. Cells were passaged such that they were confluent every 3 - 4 days. Supernatants from infected inGluc-MLV-DERSE cells were first filtered through a 0.45um filter. Supernatants were then centrifuged through a 20% sucrose cushion at 110,000*g for 1 hour. The virus pellet was resuspended in 2xNuPAGE sample buffer (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). Antiserum prepared against purified MLV p30CA(MLV30) was used. NoneDetection used Western Lightning Plus-ECL from Perkin Elmer (Waltham, MA). 5uL of inGluc-MLV-DERSE cell culture supernatant (0.45um filtered) was mixed with 25uL of RT assay buffer (62.5mM Tris pH 8.0, 25mM KCl, 0.6mM MnCl2(added immediately before use), 10mM DTT (added immediately before use), 5ug/mL oligo(dT), 50ug/mL poly(rA), 0.25% v/v Nonidet P40 and 3.75 Ci/mmol [alpha-32P]-TTP (added immediately before use)). Oligo(dT) 12-18mer was purchased from Gene Link (Hawthorne, NY), poly(rA) from GE Healthcare (Piscataway, NJ) and [alpha-32P]-TTP from Perkin Elmer (Waltham, MA). Assays were incubated for 4 hours at 32 degrees C and then 5uL of the mixture was spotted onto a DEAE filter mat (Perkin Elmer, Waltham, MA). The filter mat was dried (85 degrees C for 10 minutes) and then washed 4 times for 10 minutes each in 2xSSC then twice for 5 minutes each in ethanol. The filter mat was dried again (85 degrees C for 10 minutes) and then placed in a32P cassette (Perkin Elmer, Waltham, MA). 32P activity was measured in a microbeta Trilux luminescence and liquid scintillation counter for 1 minute per sample. Genomic DNA was extracted using the QIAmp DNA Mini kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). Amplification of the Glucgene was achieved using 3'Gluc-F (5'-CAG GAA TCT CAG GAA TGT C-3'); InGluc(5'-FAM-TGG GAC AGG CAG ATC AGA CAG-BHQ1-3') and SpGluc-R (5'-GGG AAG TTG CCC GGG AA-3'). The 5 nucleotides on the 5'end of the SpGluc-R primer target Glucsequence 5' of the intron, while the 12 nucleotides on the 3'end of the SpGluc-R primer target Glucsequence 3' of the intron. In this way, SpGluc-R targets only the functional Glucgene. CCR5 was amplified using CCR5-F (5-CCAGAAGAGCTGAGACATCCG-3); CCR5-PR (5'-HEXTCCCCTACAAGAAACTCTCCCCGG-BHQ1-3'); and CCR5-R (5'-GCCAAGCAGCTGAGAGGTTACT-3'). NoneAmpliTaq Gold polymerase and associated buffer were purchased from Applied Biosystems/Life Technologies (Foster City, CA). A master mix of PCR reagents was prepared such that the final concentrations in the PCRs were: 1xPCR buffer; 300nM dNTPs; 2.5mM MgCl2; 50nM CCR5-F; 50nM CCR-R; 50nM CCR-PR; 500nM Gluc-F; 500nM SpGluc-R; 100nM InGlucand 0.06 Units/uL polymerase. Reactions were heated to 95 degrees C for 15 minutes followed by 40 cycles of 95 degrees C for 30 seconds and 60 degrees C for 90 seconds. Reactions were performed using a DNA engine Opticon 2 instrument (MJ Instruments, now BioRad, Hercules, CA). Fluorescence profiles are presented on a log scale and are global minimum background subtracted as described by the Opticon Monitor 2 software.