Dopamine D4receptors are expressed in the prefrontal cortex (PFC), in GABAergic interneurons and in glutamatergic pyramidal neurons, including their striatal projections. None-NoneD4receptors have been implicated in ADHD. None,None,NoneIn fact, the PFC and associated fronto-striatal circuits are critical for executive function and are involved in ADHD. NoneThe gene encoding the human D4receptor contains a large number of polymorphisms in its coding sequence. NoneThe most extensive polymorphism is found in exon 3, a region that codes for the third intracellular loop (3IL) of the receptor. This polymorphism consists of a variable number of tandem repeats (VNTR) in which a 48-bp sequence exists as 2- to 11-fold repeats. NoneThe three most common variants contain two, four and seven repeats (D4.2, D4.4and D4.7, respectively). D4.4constitutes the most frequent variant, with a global frequency of 64%, followed by D4.7(21%) and D4.2(8%). NoneImportantly, a high prevalence of the D4.7variant has been demonstrated in children diagnosed with ADHD. NoneThough stimulation of the D4,7variant has been reported to be less potent at inhibiting cAMP than D4.2or D4.4,Nonethe functional significance of these variants are poorly understood. Receptor heteromers are becoming the focus of extensive research in the field of G-protein-coupled receptors. NoneA receptor heteromer is currently defined as a macromolecular complex composed of at least two (functional) receptor units with biochemical properties that are demonstrably different from those of its individual components. NoneIn some cases, receptor heteromers provide a framework in which to understand the role of receptors with no clear functional significance, and example being the D3receptor, which forms heteromers with the D1receptor and modifies its function. NoneA recent study showed that in mammalian transfected cells the long isoform of the D2receptor (D2L) heteromerizes with the three main D4receptor variants, D4.2, D4.4. and D4.7. NoneInterestingly, results from the same study suggested that D4.7was less effective in forming heteromers with D2Lreceptors. NoneIn view of the reported evidence of predominant co-localization of D4receptors with the short isoform of the D2receptor (D2S) in cortico-striatal glutamatergic terminals,None,None,Nonewe first investigated if any of the three main human variants of the D4receptor could interact both physically and functionally with D2S. By using the Bioluminescence Resonance Energy Transfer (BRET) technique, here we show evidence for the formation of heteromers between D2Sand D4.2and D4.4variants of the D4receptor. In contrast, the D4.7variant failed to form heteromers with the D2Sreceptor. In transfected cells we found a biochemical property of the D2S-D4receptor heteromer, which consists of the ability of D2Sreceptor activation to potentiate D4receptor-mediated MAPK signaling. A similar result was observed in striata from wild-type mice, a species that expresses D4receptors with a short 3IL comparable to human D4.2. In contrast, potentiation of D4receptor-mediated MAPK signaling was not observed in transfected cells expressing D4.7or in striata taken fromknock-inmice carrying a humanized 7 repeat intracellular loop identical to that found in human D4.7. Finally, analyzing neurotransmitter release in striatal slices and within vivomicrodialysis in rats, evidence was obtained for a key role of D2-D4receptor interaction in the modulation of striatal glutamatergic neurotransmission. The synthetic cDNAs for the human D4.2, D4.4and, D4.7receptor gene (kindly provided by T.P. Sakmar, Rockefeller University, USA) were amplified using sense oligonucleotide primer (5'- TCAACGGGACTTTCCAAAATGT-3') and antisense primer (5' CTCCGAGATCAACTTCTGCTCGCTTCGGTTACCC-3') resulting in a cDNA fragment of 200 bp. A second product was generated using the sense oligonucleotide primer (5'- AAGTTGATCTCGGAGGAAGATACAGCAGATGCAG-3') and antisense primer (5'- GCGAATTCGCAGCAAGCACGTAGAGCCTTACG-3') resulting in a cDNA fragment of 1500 bp. Equimolar quantities of both fragments were used to produce a third product corresponding to the myc-D4.2, myc-D4.4or myc-D4.7tagged gene using the sense primer (5'- GTGCTCGAGCACCATGGGTAACCGAAGCACAG-3') and antisense primer without its stop codon (5'- GCGAATTCTCAGCAGCAAGCACGTAGAGCCTTACG-3') harbouring unique XhoI and EcoRI restriction sites, respectively. The fragments were then subcloned in-frame into XhoI/EcoRI sites of the pcDNA3.1 vector (Invitrogen). Next, the human cDNAs for the adenosine A1receptor and dopamine D4.2, D4.4, D4.7and D2Sreceptors, cloned inpcDNA3.1were amplified without their stop codons using sense and antisense primers harboring unique XhoI and EcoRI sites to clone A1, D4.2, D4.4and D4.7receptors in the RLuc and the YFP corresponding vectors, and HindIII and BamHI to clone D2Sin the RLuc and the YFP corresponding vectors. The mouse cDNAs for the D4and D2Sreceptors, cloned in pCMV-SPORT6 (ATCC, Manassas, USA) and pReceiver-M16 vectors respectively (GeneCopoeia, Rockville, USA), were amplified without their stop codons using sense and antisense primers harboring unique XhoI and EcoRV sites to clone D4receptor in the RLuc corresponding vector, and XhoI and KpnI to clone D2Sreceptor in the RLuc and the YFP corresponding vectors. The amplified fragments were subcloned to be in-frame into restriction sites of the multiple cloning sites of EYFP-N3 vector (enhanced yellow variant of YFP; Clontech, Heidelberg, Germany) or the mammalian humanized pRluc-N1 vectors (Perkin-Elmer, Waltham, MA, USA) to give the plasmids that express the receptors fused to either Rluc or YFP on the C-terminal end of the receptor (D4.2-RLuc, D4.4-RLuc, D4.7-Rluc, D2S-RLuc and A1-RLuc or D2S-YFP, D4.7-YFP, and D1-YFP, respectively). All constructs were verified by nucleotide sequencing and the fusion proteins are functional and expressed at the membrane level (see Results). Human embryonic kidney (HEK)-293T cells were grown in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM) (Gibco Paisley, Scotland, UK) supplemented with 2 mM L-glutamine, 100 U/ml penicillin/streptomycin, and 5% (v/v) heat inactivated Foetal Bovine Serum (FBS) (all supplements were from Invitrogen, Paisley, Scotland, UK). CHO cell lines were maintained in alpha-MEM medium without nucleosides, containing 10% fetal calf serum, 50 ug/ml penicillin, 50 ug/ml streptomycin and 2 mM L-glutamine (300 ug/mL). Cells were maintained at 37 degrees C in an atmosphere of 5% CO2, and were passaged when they were 80-90% confluent, twice a week. HEK-293T or CHO cells growing in 6-well dishes or in 25 cm2flasks were transiently transfected with the corresponding fusion protein cDNA by the PEI (PolyEthylenImine, Sigma, Steinheim, Germany) method as previously described. NoneFor immunocytochemistry, HEK-293T cells were grown on glass coverslips and transiently transfected with 1 ug of cDNA corresponding to human D4.2-RLuc, D4.4-RLuc or D4.7-RLuc and 0.5 ug of cDNA corresponding to human D2S-YFP or 0.8 ug of cDNA corresponding to mouse D4-RLuc and 0.5 ug of cDNA corresponding to mouse D2S-YFP. After 48h of transfection cells were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 15 min and washed with phosphate-buffered saline contraining 20 mM glycine to quench the aldehyde groups. After permeabilization with phosphate-buffered saline containing 0.05% Triton X-100 for 15 min, cells were treated with phosphate-buffered saline containing 1% bovine serum albumin. After 1 h at room temperature, cells were labeled with the primary rabbit monoclonal anti-human D4receptor (1/10.000, Abcam, Cambridge, UK) or with the primary goat polyclonal anti-D4receptor (1/500, Santa Cruz Biotechnology) for 1 h, washed and stained with the secondary antibody Cy3 anti-rabbit (1/200, Jackson ImmunoResearch, Baltimore, PA) or with the secondary antibody Cy3 anti-goat (1/200, Jackson ImmunoResearch, Baltimore, PA). The D2S-YFP construct was detected by its fluorescence properties. Samples were rinsed and observed in an Olympus confocal microscope. HEK-293T cells were co-transfected with a constant amount of cDNA encoding for the receptor fused to Rluc and with increasingly amounts of cDNA encoding to the receptor fused to YFP to measure BRET as previously described (23). Both fluorescence and luminescence for each sample were measured before every experiment to confirm similar donor expressions (approximately 100,000 bioluminescence units) while monitoring the increase in acceptor expression (2000 to 20,000 fluorescence units). The relative amounts of BRET acceptor are expressed as the ratio between the net fluorescence of the acceptor and the luciferase activity of the donor being the net fluorescence the fluorescence of the acceptor minus the fluorescence detected in cells only expressing the donor. The BRET ratio is defined as [(emission at 510-590)/(emission at 440-500)] - Cf, where Cf corresponds to (emission at 510-590)/(emission at 440-500) for the D4-RLuc or D2S-Rluc constructs expressed alone in the same experimental conditions. Curves were fitted by using a non-linear regression equation, assuming a single phase with GraphPad Prism software (San Diego, CA, USA). A targeting vector was designed such that coding sequences of the 3IL of mouseDrd4were replaced by human ortholog sequences corresponding to the most frequent 7-VNTR human variant allele (seeFigure 4). The vector included a selectable PGK-neocassette, flanked by two loxP sites, placed just downstream ofDrd4polyadenylation site and an HSV-thymidine kinase cassette placed at one of the extremes of the targeting vector to select for the absence of random integrations. A long and short arm ofDrd4homology were inserted flanking the swapped sequence and the selectable marker, respectively. The linearized vector was used to electroporate hybrid 129svev/C57BL/6 ES cells (inGenious Targeting Laboratory Inc., USA) and homologous recombinant clones were selected in the presence of G418 and gancyclovir. Two selected clones carrying the human 7-VNTR were used to microinject C57BL/6J blastocysts and one high percentage chimeric male mouse was used to produce heterozygoteDrd4Nonemice. The neo cassette was excissed from the recombinant allele by crossing mutant mice with transgenic mice expressing Cre recombinase from an EIIa promoter (Jackson Laboratories, USA; Cat. No. 003724). The resulting heterozygoteDrd4None(D4.7knockin) mice were successively bred to C57BL/6J mice to obtain a congenic heterozygote strain (n=10) that was used to establish a breeding colony. Homozygous D4.7knockin mice and their wild-type littermates were used for the experiments. Knockin animals were characterized as indicated inFigure 4. Mice were housed five per cage in a temperature (21 +/- 1 degrees C) and humidity-controlled (55 +/- 10%) room with a 12:12 hours light/dark cycle (light between 08:00 and 20:00 hours) with food and waterad libitum. All animal procedures were conducted according to standard ethical guidelines (National Institutes of Health Animal care guidelines and European Communities Council Directive 86/609/EEC) and approved by the Local Ethical and Animal Care Committees. Transgenic mice and litter-mattes were decapitated with a guillotine and the brains were rapidly removed and placed in ice-cold oxygenated (O2/CO2:95%/5%) Krebs-HCO3-buffer (124 mM NaCl, 4 mM KCl, 1.25 mM NaH2PO4, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 1.5 mM CaCl2, 10 mM glucose and 26 mM NaHCO3, pH 7.4). The brains were sliced at 4 degrees C in a brain matrix (Zivic Instruments, Pittsburgh, PA, USA) into 0.5 mm coronal slices. Slices were kept at 4 degrees C in Krebs-HCO3-buffer during the dissection of the striatum. Each slice was transferred into an incubation tube containing 1 ml of ice-cold Krebs-HCO3-buffer. The temperature was raised to 23 degrees C and after 30 min, the media was replaced by 2 ml Krebs-HCO3-buffer (23 degrees C). Striatal slices from transgenic mice and litter-mattes were incubated under constant oxygenation (O2/CO2:95%/5%) at 30 degrees C for 4-5 h in an Eppendorf Thermomixer (5 Prime, Inc., Boulder, CO, USA) with Krebs-HCO3-buffer. The media was replaced by 200 ul of fresh Krebs-HCO3-buffer and incubated for 30 min before the addition of ligands. Transfected CHO cells were cultured in serum-free medium for 16 h before the addition of the indicated concentration of ligands for the indicated time. Both, cells and slices were lysed in ice-cold lysis buffer (50 mM Tris- HCl pH 7.4, 50 mM NaF, 150 mM NaCl, 45 mM beta-glycerophosphate, 1% Triton X-100, 20 uM phenylarsine oxide, 0.4 mM NaVO4and protease inhibitor cocktail). Cellular debris was removed by centrifugation at 13,000 g for 5 min at 4 degrees C and protein was quantified by the bicinchoninic acid method using bovine serum albumin dilutions as standard. To determine the level of ERK1/2 phosphorylation, equivalent amounts of protein (10 ug) were separated by electrophoresis on a denaturing 10% SDS-polyacrylamide gel and transferred onto PVDF-FL membranes. Odyssey blocking buffer (LICOR Biosciences, Lincoln, Nebraska, USA) was then added and membranes were blocked for 90 min. Membranes were then probed with a mixture of a mouse anti-phospho-ERK 1/2 antibody (1:2500, Sigma, Steinheim, Germany) and rabbit anti-ERK 1/2 antibody (1:40000, Sigma) for 2-3 h. Bands were visualized by the addition of a mixture of IRDye 800 (anti-mouse) antibody (1:10000, Sigma) and IRDye 680 (anti-rabbit) antibody (1:10000, Sigma) for 1 h and scanned by the Odyssey infrared scanner (LICOR Biosciences, Lincoln, Nebraska, USA). Bands densities were quantified using the scanner software and exported to Excel (Microsoft, Redmond, WA, USA). The level of phosphorylated ERK1/2 isoforms was normalized for differences in loading using the total ERK protein band intensities. Male Sprague-Dawley rats (Charles River Laboratory, Wilmington, MA, USA), weighing 300-350 g were used. Concentric microdialysis probes with 2-mm long dialysis membranes were prepared as described previously. NoneAnimals were anesthetized with Equithesin (NIDA Pharmacy, Baltimore, MD, USA) and microdialysis probes were implanted in the ventral striatum (core of the nucleus accumbens); coordinates with respect to bregma: A 1.7, L +1.2 and V -7.6 mm. The experiments were performed on freely moving rats 24 h after the probe implantation. A Ringer solution (in mmol/l) of 147 NaCl, 4 KCl, and 2.2 CaCl2was pumped through the dialysis probe at a constant rate of 1 ul/min. After a washout period of 90 min, samples were collected at 20-min intervals and split into two fractions of 10 uL, to separately measure glutamate and dopamine contents. Each animal was used to study the effect of one treatment by local administration (perfusion by reverse dialysis) of the D4receptor agonist RO-10-5824 or the D4receptor antagonist L-745,870. At the end of the experiment, rats were killed with an overdose of Equithesin and methylene blue was perfused through the probe. The brain was removed and placed in a 10% formaldehyde solution, and coronal sections were cut to verify the probe location. Dopamine content was measured by reverse high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) coupled to an electrochemical detector, as described in detail previously. NoneGlutamate content was measured by HPLC coupled to a flourimetric detector, as described before. NoneThe limit of detection (which represents three times baseline noise levels) for dopamine and glutamate was 0.5 and 50 nM, respectively. Dopamine and glutamate values were transformed as percentage of the mean of the three values before the stimulation and transformed values were statistically analyzed with one-way repeated measures ANOVA followed by Newman-Keuls tests, to compare glutamate and dopamine values of the samples obtained after drug perfusion with those obtained just before drug perfusion. Rat brain slices were obtained from male Wistar rats weighing 180-220 g. After rapid sacrifice of the rat, the brain was immersed in oxygenated ice-cold artificial cerebrospinal fluid (ACSF) solution, and coronal brain slices (300 um thick) were obtained with a vibratome. The striatum (caudate-putamen and nucleus accumbens) was microdissected under a stereoscopic microscope and the slices were incubated for 30 min at 37 degrees C in ACSF (in mM: NaCl 118.25, KCl 1.75, MgSO41, KH2PO41.25, NaHCO325, CaCl22, and D-glucose 10. ), gassed continuously with O2/CO2(95:5, v/v). For GABA release, the slices were then incubated for 30 min with 8 nM [3H]GABA in 2 ml solution containing 10 uM aminooxyacetic acid (to inhibit GABA transaminase, thus preventing degradation of the labeled GABA). At the end of this period, excess radiolabeled compound was removed by washing twice with ACSF containing, in addition to aminooxyacetic acid and 10 uM nipecotic acid (to prevent the reuptake of the released [3H]GABA). Both compounds were present in the perfusion solution for the rest of the experiment. For dopamine release, the slices were labeled with 77 nM [3H]dopamine in Krebs-Henseleit solution containing 10 uM pargyline, 0.57 mM ascorbic acid and 0.03 mM EDTA, which were present in the solutions for the rest of the experiment. For glutamate release, the tissues were incubated for 30 min with 100 nM [3H]glutamate in 2 ml of artificial CSF containing 200 uM aminooxyacetic acid (to inhibit glutamate decarboxylase and prevent the conversion of glutamate to GABA) and 200 uM dihydrokainic acid (to prevent the uptake of [3H]glutamate by astrocytes). Dihydrokainic acid was present in the medium only during the incubation period. At the end of this period, the excess radiolabeled compound was removed by washing twice with artificial CSF. Methods for measuring [3H]neurotransmitter release and data analysis used in the present work were the same as those described previously. None,NoneThe slices were apportioned randomly between the chambers (usually three slices per chamber) of a superfusion system (volume of each chamber 80 ul; 20 chambers in parallel) and perfused with the artificial CSF at a flow rate of 0.5 ml/min for 1 h. Basal release of [3H]neurotransmitter was measured by collecting 4 fractions of the superfusate (total volume 2 ml) before depolarizing the slices with a solution in which the [K+] was raised to 25 mM. The composition of the high K+solution was (in mM): NaCl 101.25, KCl 23.75, MgSO41, KH2PO41.25, NaHCO325, CaCl22 and D-glucose 10. Six more fractions were collected in the high K+medium. All drugs were added to the medium at fraction 2, before changing the superfusion to the high K+medium, to explore effects on basal release. To determine the total amount of tritium remaining in the tissue, the slices were collected, treated with 1 ml of 1 M HCl and allowed to stand for 1 h before adding the scintillator. The [3H]neurotransmitter release was expressed initially as a fraction of the total amount of tritium remaining in the tissue. The effect of drugs on the basal release of [3H]neurotransmitter was assessed by comparing the fractional release in fraction 2 (immediately before exposure of the tissue to the drug) and fraction four (immediately prior to exposure to 25 mM of K+), using Student's pairedttest. Changes in depolarization-induced [3H]GABA release by drugs and treatments, were assessed by comparing the area under the appropriate release curves between the first and last fractions collected after the change to high K+. The significance of drug effects was assessed by one-way ANOVA and Tukey-Kramer test, using Prism Graph Pad Software 4.0, (Graph Pad Software, San Diego CA, USA). To obtain an unbiased estimate of IC50values, concentration-response data were fitted by non-linear regression using the same software. Statistical analyses were performed with Prism Graph Pad Software 4.0, (Graph Pad Software, San Diego CA, USA). See above and figure legends for details. BRET experiments were performed where one of the receptor is fused to the bioluminescent proteinRenilla Luciferase(RLuc) and the other receptor is fused to a yellow fluorescent protein (YFP). The fusion proteins were functional (Supplementary Figure 1) and expressed at the membrane level (Figure 1c). Clear BRET saturation curves were obtained in cells expressing D4.2-RLuc or D4.4-RLuc receptors and increasing amounts of D2S-YFP (Figure 1a), but not in cells expressing D4.2-RLuc or D4.4-RLuc receptors and increasing amounts of D1-YFP (Figure 1a), indicating that the D4.2and the D4.4form heteromers with D2Sbut not with D1receptors. Interestingly, in cells expressing the D4.7-Rluc variant and D1-YFP or D2S-YFP (Figure 1a) low linear BRET was detected, which was qualitatively similar to the results obtained with the negative control, with adenosine A1-RLuc and D2S-YFP receptors (Figure 1a). This result was not due to the particular BRET donor and acceptor chosen, as low and linear BRET were obtained when we swapped the fused proteins, i.e., in cells co-expressing D2S-Rluc and D4.7-YFP (Figure 1a). These results strongly suggest that the human D4.7polymorphic variant does not form heteromers with the human D2Sreceptor or if heteromers are formed, the fusion proteins are not properly oriented or are not within proximity to allow energy transfer (less than 10 nm). One way to test if the receptors are indeed forming heteromers in such a way that impedes energy transfer is to titrate one receptor in the presence of the heteromer and look for changes in the BRET signal. In BRET displacement experiments, D4.2, but not D4.7receptors were able to compete with D4.4-Rluc and alter heteromer formation with D2S-YFP (Figure 1b), meaning that D4.2and D4.4, but not D4.7receptors use the same molecular determinants to establish intermolecular interactions with D2Sreceptor and strongly suggesting that D4.7receptors are unable to form heteromers with D2S. To investigate the function of the D2S-D4receptor heteromer, MAPK signaling (ERK1/2 phosphorylation) was determined. RO-10-5824 and quinelorane, selective D4and D2/3receptor agonists respectively,None,Noneselectively stimulated MAPK in cells transfected with D4or D2Sreceptors, respectively (Supplementary Figure 2). Dose-response experiments with RO-10-5824 showed no significant differences between cells transfected with D4.2, D4.4or D4.7receptors (Supplementary Figure 2). However, in co-transfected cells, stimulation of D2Sreceptors potentiated D4receptor-mediated MAPK activation, but not the other way around. Importantly, this functional interaction only occurred in cells transfected with DNoneand D4.2or D4.4, but not in cells expressing D4.7receptors (Figure 2). Since disruption of D2S-D4receptor heteromers (by substituting D4.2or D4.4with the D4.7variant) is associated with the loss of the D2S-D4receptor interaction at the MAPK level, this interaction constitutes a specific biochemical property of the D2S-D4receptor heteromer and can be used as a biochemical fingerprint to detect the heteromer in native tissues. NoneD4receptors are preferentially expressed in limbic areas and the PFC, where they can be found in interneurons and also projecting neurons. NoneIn cortico-striatal neurons D4receptors have also been localized at their nerve terminals,None,Nonewhere they can co-localize with D2Sreceptors. NoneWe therefore investigated the existence of D2S-D4receptor heteromers in the striatum. Biophysical techniques cannot be easily applied in native tissues, but indirect methods can be used, such as the identification of a biochemical property of the heteromer (biochemical fingerprint). NoneIn this case, the biochemical fingerprint would be the potentiation by D2Sreceptor activation of D4receptor-mediated MAPK activation, which should not occur with the human D4.7variant. Prior to these experiments with mouse brain, we demonstrated by BRET saturation experiments in transfected cells that the mouse D2Sreceptor forms heteromers with the mouse D4receptor (which has an amino acid sequence in the 3IL similar to that from the human D4.2). Mouse fusion proteins were expressed in the plasma membrane of transfected cells (Figure 3a) and shown to be functional (Supplementary Figure 3). Like the human receptors, mouse D2Sreceptors were found to form heteromers with mouse D4receptors and also with human D4.4receptors, but not with human D4.7receptors (Figure 3b). Furthermore, it was also shown that, in co-transfected cells, stimulation of the mouse D2Sreceptor potentiates the effect of the mouse D4, but not the human D4.7, on MAPK signaling (Figures 3c,d). This result was not reciprocal (Supplementary Figure 4) and mirrors the results obtained with human D4and D2Sreceptors (Figure 2). We next analyzed the effects of D2and D4receptor agonists on MAPK signaling on striatal slices taken from knock-in mice carrying the 7 repeats of the human D4.7in replacement of the mouse region and from wild-type littermates (Figure 4). Neither quinelorane nor RO-10-5824 induced a significant ERK1/2 phosphorylation in striatal slices of wild-type mice when administered alone, but co-administration of both agonists produced a significant dose-dependent effect with an increase of up to four fold (Figure 3e). This synergistic interaction between D2and D4receptors, which constitutes the biochemical fingerprint of the D2S-D4receptor heteromer, was completely absent in the D4.7mutant mouse (Figure 3e), confirming both the existence of D2S-D4receptor heteromers and the absence of functional interactions between D2and D4.7receptors in the brain. To investigate the functional significance of D4receptor activation we determined D4receptor-mediated modulation of striatal glutamate release byin vivomicrodialysis in freely moving rats. The local perfusion of the D4receptor agonist RO-10-5824 in the ventral striatum (in the nucleus accumbens) produced a dose-dependent decrease in the striatal extracellular concentration of glutamate and a concomitant increase in the extracellular concentration of dopamine (Figure 5a and 5b), which were counteracted by co-perfusion with the selective D4receptor antagonist L-745,870 (which was inactive when perfused alone) (Figure 5a, 5b and 5c). These results suggest that inhibitory D4receptors are located in glutamatergic terminals, whose activation decreases basal striatal glutamate release. The increase in dopamine concentration can best be explained by a decreased activation of striatal GABAergic efferent neurons that tonically inhibit dopaminergic mesencephalic neurons. This interpretation could be confirmed in experiments with striatal slices, where dopamine should not be modified due to the interruption of the striatal-mesencephalic loop. In fact, in slices of dorsal or ventral rat striatum, the D4receptor agonist RO-10-5824 decreased K+-induced glutamate release, an effect that was counteracted by the selective D4receptor antagonist L-745,870, but did not change dopamine or GABA release (Figure 6), indicating that striatal D4receptors selectively and locally modulate glutamate release. This role of D4receptors in the striatum can also explain previous results obtained with D4receptor KO mice, which show an increase and decrease in the striatal extracellular concentration of glutamate and dopamine, respectively. None,NoneAs mentioned before, there is evidence for co-localization of both D2and D4receptors in cortico-striatal glutamatergic terminalsNone,None,Noneand previous studies have demonstrated that presynaptic D2-like receptors play an inhibitory role in the modulation of striatal glutamate release. None,NoneHowever, since those studies did not use selective compounds, they could not distinguish between effects due to D2or D4receptor stimulation. Therefore, in this study we tested the effect of quinelorane alone and in combination with RO-10-5824 on glutamate release in rat striatal slices. To eliminate endogenous dopamine, rats were treated with reserpine, and the experiments performed in the presence of the D1-like receptor antagonist SCH-23390. Quinelorane significantly decreased K+-induced glutamate release whereas the co-application of quinelorane with RO-10-5824 showed a more significant effect (Figure 7a). Dopamine strongly decreased K+-induced glutamate release, an effect partially counteracted by the D2receptor antagonist L-741,626 or by the D4receptor antagonist L-745,870, but completely counteracted by the simultaneous application of both antagonists (Figure 7b). In agreement with the reported higherin vitroaffinity of D4versus D2receptor for dopamine,Nonethe IC50of dopamine-mediated inhibition of K+-induced glutamate release was significantly higher in the presence of the D4receptor antagonist (D2-mediated effect) than in the presence of the D2receptor antagonist (D4-mediated effect) (Figure 7b). Finally, and more importantly, the D2receptor agonist quinelorane synergistically potentiated the inhibitory effect of the D4receptor agonist RO-10-5824 on K+-induced glutamate release (significant decrease in IC50value) (Figure 7c), but not the other way around (Figure 7d). These results therefore show the same kind of D2-D4receptor interaction demonstrated by D2S-D4receptor heteromers in transfected cells with MAPK signaling. Our combinedin vitroandin vivodata strongly suggest that D2S-D4receptor heteromers are likely to play a key role in dopamine-mediated modulation of striatal glutamate releaseThe present study shows that dopamine D2Sand D4.2or D4.4receptors, but not the ADHD-associated human D4.7variant, form functional heteromers in transfected cells and in the rodent brain. Co-stimulation of D2Sand D4receptors in the D2S-D4receptor heteromer has a synergistic effect on MAPK signaling, which could be demonstrated in transfected cells and in the mouse striatum, but not in cells expressing D4.7or in the striatum of a mutant mouse carrying the 7 repeats of the human D4.7in the 3IL of the D4receptor. These results provide a significant functional difference of one of the human receptor variants, D4.7, compared to the D4.2and D4.4variants, which can have important implications for the understanding of the pathogenesis of ADHD. Importantly, we also demonstrated, for the first time, that D2S-D4receptor interactions modulate striatal glutamate release suggesting that the D2S-D4receptor heteromer allows dopamine to fine-tune glutamate neurotransmission. The molecular mechanism involved in preventing heteromer formation between D2Sand D4.7receptors is not yet known. Indeed, the control of heteromer formation between GPCRs is still a large question in the field. Since the D4.7receptor variant has the longest 3IL and is the only polymorphic form not forming heteromers with the D2Sreceptor, steric hindrance of the 3IL of D4.7receptor is a probable mechanism responsible for this lack of heteromerization, but other mechanisms cannot be ruled out. Using two-hybrid methodologies as well as proteomic studies, interactions between dopamine receptors and a cohort of dopamine receptor interacting proteins (DRIPs) have been demonstrated, forming signaling complexes or signalplexes. None,NoneSome of these DRIPs show selectivity for some dopamine receptor subtypes. For example, filamin or protein 4.1N interact with D2and D3receptors but not with D1, D5or D4receptors,None,Nonethe PDZ domain-containing protein, GIPC (GAIP interacting protein, C terminus) interacts with D2and D3receptor but not with the D4receptor subtypeNoneand paralemmin interacts exclusively with D3, but not with D2or D4receptors. NoneAll of these interactions modulate receptor targeting, trafficking and signaling. Proline-rich sequences of the D4receptor, mainly located in the polymorphic region of the 3IL, constitute putative SH3 binding domains which can potentially interact with adapter proteins like Grb2 and Nck, which do not have any known catalytic activity but are capable of recruiting multiprotein complexes to the receptor. NoneIt can be hypothetized that differences in DRIPs recruitment by D4.7and the other D4polymorphic forms can influence the D4.7ability to form heteromers, but future studies will be required. Previous experiments indicated that locally in the striatum dopamine inhibits glutamate release by activating D2receptors (predominantly D2S) localized in glutamatergic terminals. None,NoneOther studies also indicate that striatal postsynaptic D2receptors (predominantly D2L) indirectly modulate glutamate release by retrograde endocannabinoids signaling. NoneThe present results indicate that D4receptors also play a key role in the modulation of striatal glutamate release, likely through its ability to form heteromers with presynaptic D2Sreceptors. In the striatal D2S-D4receptor heteromer, low concentrations of dopamine should bind to the D4receptor, which has more affinity for dopamine than the D2Sreceptor,Nonecausing a certain degree of inhibition of glutamate release. However, at higher concentrations, dopamine should also bind to the D2Sreceptor and under these conditions the synergistic interaction in the D2S-D4receptor heteromer will produce an even stronger inhibition of glutamate release. Therefore, the D2S-D4receptor heteromer seems to act as a concentration-dependent device that establishes two different degrees of presynaptic dopaminergic control over striatal glutamatergic neurotransmission. Since the strong modulation observed with higher concentrations of dopamine depends on D2S-D4receptor heteromerization, the existence of a D4.7variant implies a weaker control of glutamatergic neurotransmission, which could be a main mechanism involved in the pathogenesis of ADHD. This could also explain at least part of the so far not understood successful effect of psychostimulants in ADHD, which amplify dopaminergic signaling and these medications appear to be more effective in ADHD patients with the D4.4than with the D4.7variants. None,NoneWe have to take into account that the existence of a D4.7variant does not imply ADHD is the result of this variant, but rather that it is one factor that contributes to its development. In fact, the D4.7variant might constitute a successful evolutionary trait under the appropriate environmental exposure. None,NoneThe present study provides a new element of interest in the field of receptor heteromes, which now become new targets to be studied when dealing with functional differences associated with polymorphisms of G-protein-coupled receptor genes.