The first event in cancer metastasis is the movement of cancer cells away from the primary tumour tissue. Thereafter, cancer cells invade surrounding tissues and intravasate into vessels. Several reports have shown that the invasive capability of cancer cells is acquired by transformation to the mesenchymal phenotype (the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT;Nieto, 2011). Moreover, EMT may produce cancer stemness properties (AlisonNone, 2011). Inducers such as TWIST1, (Kang and Massague, 2004) SNAI1, (PenaNone, 2009) ZEB1, and ZEB2 (ChuaNone, 2007) are reported to be associated with EMT in cancer cells. Most recently,OcanaNone(2012)reported that a newly identified EMT inducer, paired related homoeobox 1 (PRRX1), promoted full EMT in cancer cells. However, they focused on the mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition (MET;ThieryNone, 2009) They showed that the loss ofPRRX1was required for cancer metastasis. Downregulation ofPRRX1caused the acquisition of MET. LowPRRX1expression levels were significantly associated with metastasis and poor prognosis in the analysis of clinical samples of breast cancer and lung squamous cell carcinoma. Furthermore, the stemness phenotype was suppressed byPRRX1-induced EMT, andPRRX1had to be downregulated to activate stem cell properties and allow colonisation. These findings were clearly distinct from previous analyses of EMT and the stemness phenotype. We noted that the function ofPRRX1in colorectal cancer (CRC) cells had not been elucidated. Thus, the purpose of the present study was to verify thatPRRX1induced EMT in CRC cells. We also examined the clinical significance ofPRRX1in CRC cases. A total of 173 CRC samples were obtained during surgery. All patients underwent resection of the primary tumour at Kyushu University Beppu Hospital and affiliated hospitals between 1992 and 2007. Full informed consent was obtained from all individuals according to the local ethical review board approval. Detailed information is described in theSupplementary Material. The human CRC cell lines DLD-1 and COLO-205 were obtained from the Japanese Cancer Research Bank (Tokyo, Japan) and maintained in RPMI 1640 medium containing 10% foetal bovine serum, 100 units per ml penicillin, and 100 mug ml-1streptomycin sulphate. All cells were cultured in a humidified 5% CO2incubator at 37 degrees C.To generatePRRX1expression lentiviral vectors, we amplified the insert (full-length humanPRRX1;NM_022716.2) by PCR from human reference cDNA. Lentiviruses were produced by transient transfection of HEK293T cells with pCMV-VSV-G-RSV-Rev, pCAG-HIVgp, and either CSII-CMV-HOTAIR or CSII-CMV-MCS (empty) plasmid DNAs (5'-XhoI and 3'-EcoRI sites) plus Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) following the manufacturer's protocol. qRT-PCR was performed in a LightCycler 480 instrument (Roche Applied Science, Basel, Switzerland) using a LightCycler 480 Probes Master kit or LightCycler 480 SYBR Green I Master kit (Roche Applied Science), following the manufacturer's protocol. The detailed protocol and the primer sequences used here are described in theSupplementary MaterialandSupplementary Table 1. Total protein was extracted fromPRRX1-expressing cell lines and mock cell lines. Aliquots of total protein (40 mug) were electrophoresed in 10% concentrated polyacrylamide gel, and then electrophoresed and electroblotted as previously described (IetaNone, 2007). Detailed information can be found in theSupplementary Material. The 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide assay (Roche Applied Science) was used to evaluate cell proliferation. The BD BioCoat Tumor Invasion System, 8 mum pores (BD Bioscience, San Jose, CA, USA), was used to evaluate invasive capacity, following the manufacturer's protocol. Detailed information is provided in theSupplementary Material. Detailed information is provided in theSupplementary Material. We obtained CRC expression profiles from the National Center for Biotechnology Information Gene Expression Omnibus database (accession codes GSE17536 and GSE14333) and analysed these expression profiles using gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA;SubramanianNone, 2005). Detailed information is available in theSupplementary Material. For continuous variables, data were expressed as means+/-s.d. The relationship betweenPRRX1mRNA expression and clinicopathological factors was analysed using achi2-test and a Student'st-test. Findings were considered significant when theP-value was less than 0.05. All tests were performed using JMP software (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC, USA). To examine whetherPRRX1induced EMT in CRC cells, we utilised ectopicPRRX1-expressing CRC cell lines. PRRX1-expressing cells showed a more spindle-like shape than did mock cells (Figure 1A). BothPRRX1-expressing cell lines had a significantly lower level of E-cadherin gene expression and a higher level of vimentin gene expression than did mock cells (Figure 1B). We also analysed the expression of well-known EMT transcription factors (Supplementary Figure 1). The data revealed that ectopic expression ofPRRX1significantly affected the expression of EMT transcription factorsTWIST1andZEB1, but the directionality of the changes was not consistent between the cell lines. However, GSEA on two published clinical data sets of CRC (GSE17536 (SmithNone, 2010) and GSE14333 (JorissenNone, 2009)) suggested thatPRRX1expression was significantly correlated with the EMT signature (Figure 1C). To further investigate the participation ofPRRX1in cancer invasiveness, invasion assays were carried out. PRRX1-expressing cells were more invasive than were mock cells in both cell lines (Figure 1D). On the other hand, cell proliferation was not affected by ectopic PRRX1 expression (Figure 1E). Our data indicated thatPRRX1enhanced the invasive CRC phenotype via EMT inductionin vitro. With regard to the previously reported stemness properties induced by loss ofPRRX1(OcanaNone, 2012), we verified the association between expression ofPRRX1and representative CRC stem cell markers (BarkerNone, 2009;Merlos-SuarezNone, 2011). EctopicPRRX1expression upregulatedEPHB2, an intestinal stem cell marker, butLGR5was adversely decreased (Figure 2A). Next, a sphere formation assay was carried out to investigate the impact ofPRRX1on the stem-like phenotype of CRC cells. PRRX1-expressing cell lines showed a significant increase in colony formation compared with mock cells (Figure 2B). Further, soft agar colony-formation assays revealed the higher capability of anchorage-independent growth ofPRRX1-expressing cells compared with mock cells (Figure 2C). Therefore, the current findings indicated thatPRRX1induced the stemness phenotype in CRC in at least one pathway. To determine howPRRX1expression influenced cancer metastasis and disease prognosis in CRC, we analysed the relationship between thePRRX1expression level, clinicopathological factors, and prognostic data. PPRX1mRNA expression levels of 173 CRC tissues were assessed by qRT-PCR. Cases were subdivided into two groups according toPRRX1mRNA expression level by the minimumP-value approach, which is a comprehensive method to find the optimal risk separation cut-off point in continuous measurements (MizunoNone, 2009). ThePRRX1high expression group (N=64) had a significantly poorer overall survival rate than did thePRRX1low expression group (N=109) (Figure 3A). Clinicopathological factors were compared between the high and lowPRRX1mRNA expression groups (Supplementary Table 2). The highPRRX1expression group showed a higher risk for invasion. In addition, univariate and multivariate analyses of lymph node metastasis revealed that thePRRX1expression level was an independent indicator for lymph node metastasis (Supplementary Table 3). However, there was a discrepancy between our data on CRC and those ofOcanaNone(2012)who showed that the low expression group had a significantly poorer prognosis in breast cancer and lung squamous cell carcinoma. We also analysed two other independent data sets described above (GSE17536 and GSE14333). In accordance with our results, the highPRRX1expression group showed poorer prognosis than did the lowPRRX1expression group in both data sets (Figures 3Band2C). We have shown thatPRRX1, a newly identified EMT inducer, enhances the mesenchymal and stem-like phenotype of CRC cells. Moreover, high expression ofPRRX1was significantly correlated to metastasis and poor prognosis. Our results on the relationship betweenPRRX1expression and cancer prognosis differ substantially from those ofOcanaNone(2012). Thus, our results suggest thatPRRX1expression is associated with different phenotypes in different types of cancer cells. For example, breast cancer cells acquire MET and stem-like phenotypes by loss ofPRRX1(OcanaNone, 2012). In contrast, CRC cells show EMT and stem-like phenotypes when they expressPRRX1. Our data on CRC agree with a very recent report that showed thatPRRX1has a central role in pancreatic regeneration and carcinogenesis (ReichertNone, 2013). In the current study, twoPRRX1-expressing cell lines differed in their expression profiles of EMT transcription factors (Supplementary Figure 1). We speculate that this is becausePRRX1induces EMT independently of classical EMT pathways as shown byOcanaNone(2012). The pathways activating EMT and stemness properties in intestinal tissue (YanNone, 2012;ZhuNone, 2013) might be diverse, and further studies are required. In the current study, we focused on expression ofPRRX1,a gene that regulates EMT and stem cell properties. Our results demonstrated different roles forPRRX1in CRC from those in breast cancer. It has been suggested that transforming growth factor-beta(OcanaNone, 2012) and microRNA (YangNone, 2013) regulate the expression ofPRRX1. However, details are lacking and further analysis is required to uncover the signalling network regulatingPRRX1. Such data will be important for the development of new therapeutic approaches to control cancer metastases.