Among eudicot families, it is well established that family Chenopodiaceae has the largest number of C4species (Akhani et al., 1997;Kadereit and Freitag, 2011;Sage et al., 2012), and also the greatest diversity in C4-type leaf anatomy, with eight main structural types (Carolin et al., 1975;Edwards and Voznesenskaya, 2011), and up to 16 forms considering all differences (Kadereit et al., 2003). This includes the occurrence of Kranz anatomy around individual veins as well as Kranz anatomy with a concentric dual layer of cells surrounding all the veins in the leaf, and two structural forms of C4occurring in individual cells without Kranz anatomy. Currently, 10 C4lineages have been recognized in Chenopodiaceae (Kadereit and Freitag, 2011;Sage et al., 2012). C3-C4intermediates are important in studying the evolution of C4photosynthesis. They have been identified in 14 families: Amaranthaceae, Asteraceae, Boraginaceae, Brassicaceae, Chenopodiaceae, Cleomaceae, Euphorbiaceae, Molluginaceae, Nyctaginaceae, Portulacaceae, Cyperaceae, Hydrocharitaceae, Scrophulariaceae, and Poaceae (Sage et al., 2011;Khoshravesh et al., 2012). However, despite the diversity of C4in family Chenopodiaceae, to date only one species,Salsola arbusculiformisin subfamily Salsoloideae, has been structurally and functionally characterized to be a C3-C4intermediate (Voznesenskaya et al., 2001). Another species,Sedobassia sedoidesin subfamily Camphorosmoideae, was recently suggested to be an intermediate based on anatomical features (Kadereit and Freitag, 2011); and shown to function as an intermediate based on gas exchange analysis and immunolocalization of glycine decarboxylase (GDC) (NKK, EVV, and GEE, unpublished data). In Chenopodiaceae, most species which have been analysed in subfamily Salsoloideae have C4-type photosynthesis and Kranz anatomy (Zalenskii and Glagoleva, 1981;Pyankov and Vakhrusheva, 1989;Pyankov et al., 1999,2000,2001None,2002). Most representatives of the genusSalsola sensu lato (s.l.) are C4plants with the so-called Salsoloid (Carolin et al., 1975) or 'crown-centric' (Voznesenskaya and Gamaley, 1986;Edwards and Voznesenskaya, 2011) type of Kranz leaf anatomy with two layers of chlorenchyma on the leaf periphery. The outer layer of chlorenchyma is represented by elongated palisade mesophyll (M) cells and the inner layer consists of roundish specialized Kranz cells (KCs). The main vascular bundle is in the centre of the leaf surrounded by the water storage (WS) tissue, and only small, peripheral bundles have contact with chlorenchyma. In this anatomical type, peripheral bundles have their xylem part facing towards the outer chlorenchyma layers (seeEdwards and Voznesenskaya, 2011). Also, there are two groups of species in tribe Salsoleae and within the genusSalsola s.l., one group lacking and the other group having hypodermal tissue (a subepidermal layer of roundish parenchyma cells which participates in water storage and has a lower number of organelles compared with M cells). C4species from sectionsCaroxylonandCoccosalsolahave a hypoderm, but the hypoderm is absent in species from sectionsMalpighipila,Cardiandra,Belanthera, andSalsola(Pyankov et al., 2001None). Molecular phylogenetic analyses suggest that the traditionally recognized sections ofSalsolaare not monophyletic; a revised, clade-based classification has recently reorganized sectional and generic boundaries (Akhani et al., 2007). Studies on C4photosynthesis have been largely focused on species which form Kranz anatomy with two chlorenchyma layers surrounding each vein (called a multiple simple Kranz unit byPeter and Katinas, 2003), as occurs in C4monocots and numerous C4eudicot species. However, among C4eudicots, there are nine types of Kranz anatomy with two concentric chlorenchyma layers surrounding all veins (single compound Kranz unit according toPeter and Katinas, 2003); seeEdwards and Voznesenskaya (2011). Among these is the Salsoloid type of anatomy which is characteristic for C4species in subfamily Salsoloideae. Current, commonly used structural descriptions of the dual layer of cells forming Kranz anatomy refer to the outer layer as M cells (usually consisting of palisade parenchyma) and the inner layer as specialized bundle sheath (BS) cells (referring to a layer of cells in leaves of plants which surrounds the vascular tissue). However, in C4species such as the Salsoloid type, the inner chlorenchyma layer does not form a real sheath around individual peripheral veins, but rather a sheath which encloses the veins and WS tissue. Thus, here the inner layer of chlorenchyma cells which are specialized for C4photosynthesis is referred to as the KC layer (Edwards and Voznesenskaya, 2011). All structural forms of Kranz have in common a double concentric layer of chlorenchyma cells with the outer layer of palisade M capturing atmospheric CO2in the C4cycle, and the inner layer (BS cells or KCs) donating CO2from C4acids to Rubisco in the C3cycle. It is also known that some species in genusSalsolas.l. have a different type of leaf anatomy, with multiple layers of chlorenchyma and, adjacent to veins, indistinctive BS cells with few chloroplasts. This type, described byCarolin et al. (1975)inSalsola webbiiand in the genusSympegma, was designated 'Sympegmoid', and defined as having non-Kranz-type anatomy. Analysis of the carbon isotope composition (delta13C) of plant biomass showed thatS. webbiihas C3-type values (Akhani et al., 1997;Winter, 1981). To date, several species in the genusSalsolahave been identified as having this C3-like leaf anatomy and/or C3-type delta13C: namely,S. abrotanoides(Pyankov et al., 2001None),S. botschantzevii(Pyankov et al., 2001None),S. divaricata(Pyankov et al., 2001None),S. genistoides(Voznesenskaya, 1976;Akhani et al., 1997;Pyankov et al., 2001None),S. drobovii(Butnik, 1984;Pyankov et al., 2001None),S. laricifolia(Wen and Zhang, 2011),S. masenderanica(Pyankov et al., 2001None),S. montana(Akhani et al., 1997;Akhani and Ghasemkhani, 2007),S. oreophila(Pyankov et al., 1997),S. pachyphylla(Butnik, 1984),S. tianshanica(Pyankov et al., 2001None), andS. webbii(Carolin et al., 1975;Winter, 1981;Akhani et al., 1997;Pyankov et al., 2001None). Salsola arbusculiformishas C3-type carbon isotope composition (Akhani et al., 1997;Akhani and Ghasemkhani, 2007) and intermediate anatomy with Kranz-like BS cells around the veins (Pyankov et al., 1997;Voznesenskaya et al., 2001). According toBotschantzev (1969,1976,1985,1989), all of them belong to sectionCoccosalsolain genusSalsolaand were classified in the following subsections:Genistoides(S. abrotanoides,S. genistoides, andS. webbii),Coccosalsola(S. divaricata), andArbusculae(other species). Akhani et al. (2007)showed that sectionCoccosalsolais polyphyletic and rearranged the species of this group in the clade-based genera. Further examination of the inter-relationships between structure and biochemistry inSalsolaspecies having Sympegmoid leaf structure showed thatS. oreophila, a close relative ofS. montana, has C3-type delta13C values and low activity of C4enzymes (Pyankov et al., 1997). It also has 2-3 layers of M and thin-walled BS cells with sparse chloroplasts distributed usually in the centrifugal position; thus, all structural features in this species are C3like. In contrast,S. arbusculiformiswas suggested to be a C3-C4intermediate. Although it usually has two layers of M cells, its BS was found to be Kranz like, containing rather numerous chloroplasts in the centripetal position, and the walls of these cells were thicker than in the M (Pyankov et al., 1997). A detailed study of the anatomy, biochemistry, and physiology of this species showed that it is a C3-C4intermediate (Voznesenskaya et al., 2001). It has an intermediate-type photosynthetic CO2response curve with a CO2compensation point () midway between characteristic of C3and C4species. Photorespiration was shown to be reduced by exclusive localization of GDC to BS mitochondria (a diagnostic feature of all intermediates and C4plants) which allows the photorespired CO2to be partially refixed. It is classified as a type I intermediate as it lacks a partially functional C4cycle (seeEdwards and Ku, 1987). In the present study, the carbon isotope composition was analysed for all species of polyphyletic sectionCoccosalsola(recorded byBotschantzev, 1976, 1989), includingS. botschantzevii(Botschantzev et al., 1983) andS. drummondii(Freitag and Rilke, 1997), of which a large number have C3-type values (approximately half of the 36 species). A comprehensive anatomical and physiological characterization was performed for fiveSalsolaspecies in the section having C3-type delta13C values:S. divaricata,S. genistoides,S. masenderanica,S. montana, andS. webbii, and the results were analysed relative to two C4species,Caroxylon orientale(=Salsola orientalis) andXylosalsola richteri(=S. richteri). The results show that sectionCoccosalsola, which does not form a monophyletic group relative to other sections ofSalsolaand other genera of the Salsoleae (Akhani et al., 2007), has large diversity in forms of photosynthesis. Species in tribe Salsoleae are of interest for studying the evolution of a form of C4anatomy where a single, continuous layer of Kranz tissue surrounds the veins and WS cells, as opposed to the occurrence of Kranz anatomy around individual veins. Differences in structural and functional traits were identified which suggest how Salsoloid-type C4photosynthesis evolved from C3ancestors. Seeds ofS. divaricataMasson ex Link were collected in the Canary Islands (Canaria, western coasts, near Agaete, 23.9.2002, H. Akhani 16469), while seeds ofS. masenderanicaBotsch. were collected from N Iran (Mazandaran, 169 km to Tehran, 5 km after Veresk towards Amol, 1201 m, 16.10.2003, H. Akhani 17403) and seeds ofS. montanaLitv. were collected from NE Iran (Golestan, southern parts of Golestan National Park, near Sharlegh, 15.10.2003, H. Akhani 17391). Voucher specimens are available in the Halophytes and C4Plants Research Laboratory, School of Biology, University of Tehran (Hb. Akhani). Seeds ofS. webbiiMoq. andS. genistoidesJuss. ex Poir. were provided via Jeroni Galmes from the Germplasm Collection of the University of Almeria (GERMHUAL), research group RNM-344, and Forestaria S.L (seeSupplementary Appendix S1available atJXBonline for GenBank accession numbers for new sequence information on these two species and voucher numbers of specimens in the WSU Herbarium). Seeds ofXylosalsola richteri(Moq.) Akhani E. H. Roalson (=Salsola richteriMoq.) andCaroxylon orientale(S.G. Gmel.) Tzvelev (=Salsola orientalisS.G. Gmel.) were collected in deserts of Central Asia in Uzbekistan. Seeds were stored at -18 oC before germination. They were germinated on moist paper at room temperature and then transplanted to soil. For studies on light and electron microscopy, polysaccharide content, enzyme content, and gas exchange, all plants were grown under the same conditions (in Enconair Ecological chambers, model GC-16) under a photosynthetic photon flux density (PPFD) of ~400 mumol quanta m-2s-1with a 14h/10h light/dark photoperiod and 25/18 oC day/night temperature regime. Figure 1shows the appearance of the plants during growth in the WSU chambers (Fig. 1A,D,G,J,M) and their branches (Fig. 1B,E,H,K,N), and the fruiting branches of the plants grown in nature (Fig. 1C,F,I,L,O). All species have terete succulent leaves. InS. masenderanica,S. montana,S. webbii, andS. divaricata, young plants and vegetative branches have rather long leaves (up to 2-2.5cm) (Fig. 1E,H,N) compared with shorter leaves (up to 1cm) in growth chamber-grown plants ofS. genistoidesbeginning from the early stages of seedling growth (Fig. 1A,B). Leaves were sampled from plants of different ages, from 6 week up to 2 years old. Samples of fully expanded leaves were taken from recently developed vegetative branches at the same time for determination of enzyme content and for light and electron microscopy. For most species, samples were taken from at least two or three individual plants. For comparison, two C4Salsola s.l. species, which represent two biochemical subtypes in Salsoloideae, were analysed,X. richteri, an NADP-malic enzyme (NADP-ME) species, andC. orientale, an NAD-ME species. General views of growth chamber-grown plants (A, D, G, J, M) and their branches (B, E, H, K, N), and the fruiting branches from natural habitats (C, F, I, L, O) of five Salsoleae species formerly classified underSalsolasectionCoccosalsola. Salsola genistoides(A-C),S. masenderanica(D-F),S. montana(G-I),S. webbii(J-L), andS. divaricata(M-O). C, from Herbario virtual de la Universidad de Alicante:http://www.herbariovirtual.ua.es/hoja_salsola_genistoides.htmwith permission, accessed 2 April 2013; F, I, O, by HA; L, from AlmeriNatura:http://www.almerinatura.com/, accessed 2 April 2013 with permission. Scale bars=1cm. Samples for ultrastructural characterization were fixed overnight at 4 degrees C in 2% (v/v) paraformaldehyde and 2 % (v/v) glutaraldehyde in 0.1M phosphate buffer (pH 7.2), post-fixed in 2% (w/v) OsO4, and then, after a standard acetone dehydration procedure, embedded in Spurr's resin. Cross-sections were made on a Reichert Ultracut R ultramicrotome (Reichert-Jung GmbH, Heidelberg, Germany). For light microscopy, semi-thin sections were stained with 1% (w/v) Toluidine blue O in 1% (w/v) Na2B4O7, and studied under an Olympus BH-2 (Olympus Optical Co., Ltd) light microscope equipped with an LM Digital Camera and Software (Jenoptik ProgRes Camera, C12plus, Jena, Germany). Ultra-thin sections were stained for electron microscopy with 2% (w/v) uranyl acetate followed by 2% (w/v) lead citrate. Hitachi H-600 (Hitachi Scientific Instruments, Tokyo, Japan), JEOL JEM-1200 EX (JEOL USA, Inc., MA, USA) with MegaView III Camera and Soft Imaging System Corp. (Lakewood, CO, USA) and FEI Tecnai G2 (Field Emission Instruments Company, Hillsboro, OR, USA) equipped with Eagle FP 5271/82 4K HR200KV digital camera transmission electron microscopes were used for observation and photography. For quantitative characterization of leaf tissues, cells, and organelles, the image analysis program ImageJ 1.37v (Wayne Rasband, National Institutes of Health, USA) was used. The sizes of the cells and areas of the tissues in the leaves were measured on light microscopy images of leaf cross-sections. The volume density of each tissue of interest was estimated from the ratio of the area of the tissue to the total leaf area (expressed as a percentage). The thickness of cell walls (CWs) and the size of mitochondria were measured on electron microscopy images from leaf cross-sections. The small diameters of mitochondria were measured on profiles from cross-sections. As was previously noted in quantitative studies, only the small diameter reflects the difference in size between different tissues or species since measurements of elongation are more variable as very elongated mitochondria are occasionally observed in microscopy sections (seeVoznesenskaya et al., 2007). For all measurements, 15-25 micrographs were used for analysis from at least 2-3 different leaves. To observe the pattern of leaf venation, leaves were cleared in 70% ethanol (v/v) until chlorophyll was removed, bleached with 5% (w/v) NaOH overnight, and then rinsed three times in water. At least three leaves from two different plants were used. The pattern and density (per mm2of the leaf surface area) of the peripheral venation were determined using hand-made paradermal sections. The leaf samples were mounted in water and examined under UV light [with a 4?,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) filter] on a Leica DMFSA fluorescence microscope (Leica Microsystems Wetzlar GmbH, Germany). Leaf samples were fixed at 4 degrees C in 2% (v/v) paraformaldehyde and 1.25% (v/v) glutaraldehyde in 0.05M PIPES buffer, pH 7.2 early in the morning. The samples were dehydrated with a graded ethanol series and embedded in London Resin White (LR White, Electron Microscopy Sciences, Fort Washington, PA, USA) acrylic resin. The antibody used (raised in rabbit) was against the P subunit of GDC fromPisum sativumL. (courtesy of D. Oliver). Pre-immune serum was used for controls. For transmission electron microscopy (TEM) immunolabelling, thin sections on formvar-coated nickel grids were incubated for 1h in TRIS-buffered saline-Tween (TBST)+bovine serum albumin (BSA) to block non-specific protein binding on the sections. They were then incubated for 3h with either the pre-immune serum diluted in TBST+BSA (1:50) or anti-P protein of GDC (1:10) antibody. After washing with TBST+BSA, the sections were incubated for 1h with protein A-gold (15nm) diluted 1:100 with TBST+BSA. The sections were washed sequentially with TBST+BSA, TBST, and distilled water, and then post-stained with a 1:4 dilution of 1% (w/v) potassium permanganate and 2% (w/v) uranyl acetate. Images were collected using JEOL JEM-1200 EX and FEI Tecnai G2 transmission electron microscopes. The density of labelling was determined by counting the gold particles on electron micrographs and calculating the number per unit area (mum2) with an image analysis program (ImageJ 1.37v). For each cell type, replicate measurements were made on parts of cell sections (n=10-15). Immunolabelling procedures were performed separately for different species; the difference in the labelling intensity reflects the difference between cell types but not between species. The level of background labelling was low in all cases. To reveal the localization of starch, the leaf samples were fixed in the same way as for immunolocalization, but after 15:00h. The periodic acid-Schiff's procedure was used for staining starch in sectioned materials. Sections, 0.8-1 mum thick, were dried onto gelatin-coated slides, incubated in 1% (w/v) periodic acid for 30min, washed, dried, and then incubated with Schiff's reagent (Sigma, St Louis, MO, USA) for 1h. After rinsing, the sections were ready for analysis by light microscopy. Cell walls and starch stained bright reddish pink, while other elements of the cells (cytoplasm) remained unstained. Controls lacking the periodic acid treatment (required for oxidation of the polysaccharides giving rise to Schiff's-reactive groups) showed little or no background staining (not shown). Total soluble proteins were extracted from leaves by homogenizing 0.2g of tissue in 0.2ml of extraction buffer [100mM TRIS-HCl, pH 7.5, 10mM (w/v) MgCl2, 1mM (w/v) EDTA, 15mM (v/v) beta-mercaptoethanol, 20% (v/v) glycerol, and 1mM phenylmethylsulphonyl fluoride]. Insoluble material was removed by centrifugation (5min, 14 000g). The supernatant fraction was diluted 1:1 in 60mM TRIS-HCl, pH 7.5, 4% (w/v) SDS, 20% (v/v) glycerol, 1% (v/v) beta-mercaptoethanol, and 0.1% (w/v) bromphenol blue, and boiled for 5min for SDS-PAGE. Protein concentration was determined with an RCDC protein quantification kit (Bio-Rad), which tolerates detergents and reducing agents. Protein samples (20 mug) were separated by 12% SDS-PAGE, blotted onto nitrocellulose, and probed overnight at 4 degrees C with anti-Amaranthus hypochondriacusNAD-ME IgG which was prepared against the 65kDa alpha-subunit, courtesy of J. Berry (Long and Berry, 1996) (1:5000), anti-Zea mays62kDa NADP-ME IgG, courtesy of C. Andreo (Maurino et al., 1996) (1:5000), anti-Z. maysphosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase (PEPC) IgG (1:100 000), anti-Z. mayspyruvate,Pi dikinase (PPDK) IgG, courtesy of T. Sugiyama (1:5000), and anti-Spinacia oleraceaRubisco LSU IgG (1:10 000). Goat anti-rabbit IgG-alkaline phosphatase conjugate antibody (Sigma Chemical Co.) was used at a dilution of 1:50 000 for detection. Bound antibodies were localized by developing the blots with 20mM nitroblue tetrazolium and 75mM 5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl phosphate in detection buffer (100mM TRIS-HCl, pH 9.5, 100mM NaCl, and 5mM MgCl2). For measurement of the response of photosynthesis to varying light and CO2, and for determining the CO2compensation point (), gas exchange was measured with a portable CO2analyser ADC LCPro+ (ADC BioScientific Ltd., Hoddesdon, UK). For each experiment, part of a branch of an intact plant was enclosed in the conifer chamber designed for terete or semi-terete leaves. The branch was illuminated with a PPFD of 920 mumol quanta m-2s-1under 370 mubar CO2until a steady-state rate of CO2fixation was obtained (generally 45-60min). The air temperature was 25+/-0.5 oC, the leaf temperature 27.2+/-0.2 oC, the minimum percentage humidity in the chamber was 38+/-1.5%, and the flow rate was 200 mumol s-1. For varying light experiments at 370 mubar CO2, measurements were made beginning at a PPFD of 1380, with decreasing levels at 4min intervals. For varying CO2experiments at a PPFD of 920, the CO2level was first decreased, and then increased up to 1000 mumol mol-1at 7min intervals. was determined at a PPFD of 920 and 25 oC by extrapolation of the initial slope of rates of CO2fixation (A) versus the intercellular CO2concentration in the leaf (Ci) through thex-axis where the net rate of CO2assimilation equals zero. The leaf area exposed to incident light was calculated by taking a digital image of the part of the branch that was enclosed in the chamber, and then determining the exposed leaf area using an image analysis program (ImageJ 1.37v). Measures of the carbon isotope composition were determined at Washington State University on plant samples using a standard procedure relative to PDB (Pee Dee Belemnite) limestone as the carbon isotope standard (Bender et al., 1973). Leaf samples (from plants growing in the WSU School of Biological Sciences growth chamber) were dried at 60 degrees C for 24h, milled to a fine powder, and then 1-2mg were placed in a tin capsule and combusted in a Eurovector elemental analyser. The resulting N2and CO2gases were separated by gas chromatography and admitted into the inlet of a Micromass Isoprime isotope ratio mass spectrometer (IRMS) for determination of13C/12C ratios (R). delta13C values were determined where delta=1000*(Rsample/Rstandard)-1. Samples ofS. webbiiandS. genistoideswere added to previously published data sets (Akhani et al., 2007;Wen et al., 2010) for the nuclear ribosomal DNA internal transcribed spacer region (ITS); samples utilized in the analysis are listed inSupplementary Appendix S1atJXBonline. The sequences were aligned using MUSCLE (Edgar, 2004). The aligned matrix of 110 samples and 724 aligned bases was analysed using RAxML (Stamatakis et al., 2008) with the GTR gamma model. Nine species of tribe Caroxyloneae were used as the outgroup based on previous studies (Akhani et al., 2007). Leaf anatomy was studied in fiveSalsolaspecies, formerly classified under sectionCoccosalsola, but representing different clades of Salsoleae and which were previously identified as having C3-type carbon isotope composition:S. divaricata,S. genistoides,S. masenderanica,S. montana, andS. webbii. Figure 2shows the leaf structure and the distribution of chlorenchyma in four species (S. genistoidesnot shown; its general features are very similar to those ofS. webbii). Under the fluorescent microscope (Fig. 2A-D), there is red fluorescence from the chloroplast-containing tissues and blue fluorescence from all CWs, especially from the WS tissue (the blue fluorescence is typical of species of family Chenopodiaceae due to the presence of ferulic acid in the CWs;Voznesenskaya et al., 2008). There are usually two (or 2-3) layers of palisade-like chlorenchyma (which will subsequently be referred to as M) cells directly beneath the epidermis: the outer subepidermal layer (M1) and the inner layer (M2) (Fig. 2E-H). There is an often indistinct layer of relatively small BS cells around the peripheral vascular bundles inS. masenderanica,S. montana,S. webbii(Fig. 2E-G), andS. genistoides(not shown); however, there is a continuous layer of Kranz-like cells (KLCs), internal to the M cells around the whole leaf inS. divaricata(Fig. 2H). There is WS tissue in the centre of the leaves of all species which consists of 2-4 layers of cells with some differences in size and shape (Fig. 2A-G). The peripheral vascular bundles are situated under the chlorenchyma cells with their xylem side facing towards the outside of the leaf. The main vein is located more or less in the centre of the leaf and surrounded by the WS tissue. Autofluorescence of leaf tissues (A-D), general anatomy (E-H), and starch localization (I-L) in leaves of four Salsoleae species of formerlySalsolasectionCoccosalsola. Salsola masenderanica(A, E, I),S. montana(B, F, J),S. webbii(C, G, K), andS. divaricata(D, H, L). (A-D) Autofluorescence of leaf cross-sections. (E-H) Light microscopy on leaf cross-sections showing the position of palisade mesophyll (M) and bundle sheath (BS) or Kranz-like cells (KLC). Note the continuous inner layer of KLCs inS. divaricataand the difference between outer (M1) and inner (M2) layers of mesophyll. (I-L) PAS (periodic acid-Schiff's) staining for carbohydrates; arrowheads point to starch grains. MV, main vein; VB, vascular bundles; WS, water storage tissue. Scale bars=200 mum for A-D, G; 100 mum for E, F, H; 50 mum for I-L.A quantitative study of leaf chlorenchyma showed that in four of theSalsolaspecies (S. genistoides,S. masenderanica,S. montana, andS. webbii) the cells of the outer (M1) and inner (M2) layers of the palisade M have nearly equal length (mean values of 104 mum for M1 and 118 mum for M2, seeSupplementary Table S1atJXBonline). InS. masenderanica, sometimes there are a few extremely elongated palisade parenchyma cells extending through both layers of M cells (not shown). In contrast to the above species, inS. divaricatathe layer of M1 cells is much thinner than the layer of M2 cells, with a ratio of M1/M2 cell length of 0.5 similar to the hypoderm/M ratio of the two C4species (Supplementary Table S1). Compared with the M2 layer, the cells of the outer M1 layer ofS. divaricatahave few chloroplasts and appear more like hypodermal cells (Fig. 2H,L) which occur in some C4Salsolaspecies. The arrangement of chlorenchyma cells in the leaf also differs between the species studied. The BS cells surrounding the peripheral vascular bundles inS. genistoidesandS. webbiiare not specialized and sometimes they resemble the cells of the inner layer of M or the outer layer of WS tissue, which explains why there is high variability in the size of the BS cells. InS. masenderanicaandS. montana, BS cells around the peripheral vascular bundles are more diverse and, in this case, the BS cells facing outwards are more specialized. They are smaller (area between 300 mum2and 400 mum2) and contain more organelles compared with the laterally arranged BS cells, which are elongated along the vein towards the phloem part (on transverse section) and thus have a larger area. This difference accounts for the high values for BS cell area in these two species (Supplementary Table S1). InS. divaricata, parenchyma BS cells adjacent to peripheral veins have even more advanced diversification, with the outermost cells becoming Kranz-like; and the KLCs which form a contiguous inner chlorenchyma layer on the leaf periphery are more or less similar in shape and appearance. They form clear arcs above the veins (next to the xylem) consisting of square specialized cells of nearly similar size, while between veins these KLCs are obviously larger. In the two C4species,C. orientaleandX. richteri, the size of KCs is less variable, and they have a uniform curvilinear pattern (nevertheless, there is an ~2-fold difference in the size of the KCs between the two C4species studied;Supplementary Table S1). Among the fiveSalsolaspecies, the percentage volume densities of chlorenchyma (M and BS cells, or KLCs) and WS tissue and the portion of M versus BS or KLC tissue in the leaf were compared with the two C4species (from analysis of leaf cross-sections in mature leaves). In four species,S. genistoides,S. masenderanica,S. montana, andS. webbii, the chlorenchyma occupies ~60-70% (mean 64%) of leaf volume, with the main contribution from M cells, while the BS generally comprises only 4.5-6.8% of leaf volume (mean 5.5%). However, inS. divaricata, the chlorenchyma occupies only ~37% of leaf volume and, in comparison with the above species, invests only about half as much in the M cells, with a similar volume density of the layer of KLCs (6%). In the C4species studied, the chlorenchyma occupies ~30-35% of leaf volume. The ratios of volume densities of M/BS cells was high in fourSalsolaspecies (from 9 to 15, mean=12), compared with 5.2 for the M/KLCs inS. divaricata, with the lowest ratios of M/KCs in the C4species (2.1-4.5) (Supplementary Table S2atJXBonline). The leaf volume invested in WS tissue in the four speciesS. genistoides,S. masenderanica,S. montana, andS. webbiiis low (mean 23%, lowest inS. webbiiandS. genistoides), versus 55% inS. divaricataversus a mean of 38% for the C4species (Supplementary Table S2). The specific periodic acid-Schiff's staining for polysaccharides shows a similar density of starch staining in chloroplasts of M and BS cells ofS. masenderanicaandS. montana, indicating equivalent starch storage in all chloroplasts (Fig. 2I,J). InS. webbii(Fig. 2K) andS. genistoides(not shown), there is little labelling for starch in BS cells (which is due to few chloroplasts in BS cells as shown subsequently by electron microscopy). In contrast, inS. divaricata, there is a gradient in starch distribution from little to no starch in the hypodermal layer (M1), with substantial starch in the inner palisade layer (M2), and with the largest starch grains in KLCs (Fig. 2L). Results on the pattern and density of peripheral veins in the fiveSalsolaspecies compared with the two C4representatives are shown inFig. 3andTable 1. All studied species, except forS. genistoides, have small peripheral veins distributed more or less evenly around the leaf under the chlorenchyma, especially in the middle part of the leaf, often with gaps on the adaxial and/or abaxial side below or above the main vein in cross-sections (Fig. 2A-D). InS. genistoides, peripheral veins occur in the lateral plane of the leaf and are represented by closely arranged thicker vascular bundles (not shown). Except forS. montana, all species have a similar pattern with a vein network consisting of a reticulate venation with rare terminal ends in minor veins; the network is elongated along the axis of the leaf. InS. montana, the venation consists of an elaborated reticulate network with rather numerous terminal ends (Fig. 3). The vein densities in theSalsolaspecies range from ~10mm/mm2to 15mm/mm2while the C4speciesC. orientaleandX. richterihave vein densities of 9.2mm/mm2and 15mm/mm2, respectively. The lower densities of peripheral veins inS. masenderanicaandS. divaricataare similar to that of the C4C. orientale, while the high vein density inS. genistoides,S. montanaandS. webbiiis close to that in C4X. richteri(Table 1). Vein density in representativeSalsolas.l. speciesIllustration of the venation pattern and leaf vein density on cleared leaves of three Salsoleae species of formerlySalsolasectionCoccosalsola,Salsola masenderanica(A),S. montana(B),S. divaricata(C), and the C4Salsoloid-type speciesCaroxylon orientale(D). Observation of cleared leaves under UV light shows a low branching pattern with few terminal ends and low density of the veins in three species,S. masenderanica(A),S. divaricata(C), andC. orientale(D), and a higher density of branched veins inS. montana(B). Scale bars=200 mum. Figure 4shows electron microscopy of leaf chlorenchyma for four of the 'Coccosalsola'Salsolaspecies (S. masenderanica,S. montana,S. webbii, andS. divaricata). There are differences between these in the quantity and level of development of organelles in BS cells;S. genistoides(not shown) has features which are very close to those ofS. webbii. Salsola masenderanica(Fig. 4A,B) andS. webbii(Fig. 4I,J) have the lowest occurrence of chloroplasts and mitochondria in BS cells;S. montanahave a thicker cytoplasmic layer with more organelles in BS cells (Fig. 4E,F), while the KLCs inS. divaricatacontain numerous chloroplasts and mitochondria (Fig. 4M,N). Electron microscopy of mesophyll (M) versus bundle sheath (BS) and Kranz-like cells (KLCs) in leaves of four Salsoleae species of formerlySalsolasectionCoccosalsola:S. masenderanica(A-D),S. montana(E-H),S. webbii(I-L), andS. divaricata(M-P). (A, E, I, M) Micrographs show M and BS/KLCs around vascular bundles. (B, F, J, N, O) Organelles in BS and KLCs at a higher magnification. Note the difference in abundance of organelles in BS and KLCs between species, and the numerous mitochondria in KLCs ofS. divaricata(N, O). (C, G, K, O) Chloroplast structure in BS and KCLs of the four species. (D, H, L, P) Structure of M chloroplasts in the four species. Ch, chloroplast; Mb, microbody; Mt, mitochondria; VB, vascular bundle. Scale bars=10 mum for A, E, I, M; 1 mum for B, C, F, J; 0.5 mum for D, G, H, K, L, O, P; and 2 mum for N.InS. masenderanica(Fig. 4A),S. webbii(Fig. 4I), andS. genistoides(not shown) chloroplasts and mitochondria are distributed more or less evenly around the CWs, with some mitochondria also located in a centrifugal position. However, in the BS cells ofS. montanaand KLCs ofS. divaricata, while the chloroplasts are distributed around the CWs, most of the mitochondria are located close to the inner periclinal or radial CWs (Fig. 4E,F, M-O). Bundle sheath (Fig. 4C,G,K,O) and M (Fig. 4D,H,L,P) chloroplasts in all five species have a similar structure with a well-developed system of medium sized grana. The mitochondria in BS and M cells inS. genistoides,S. masenderanica,S. montana, andS. webbiihave a similar size and structure (0.3-0.5 mum;Table 2,Fig. 4B,F,Jfor BS mitochondria); but, inS. divaricatathe KLC mitochondria are larger (average 0.6 mum;Table 2) and they have a more elaborated system of cristae (Fig. 4N,O). The KC mitochondria ofC. orientale(an NAD-ME-type C4species), which are 2.3 times larger than in M cells, are about the same size as the KLC mitochondria inS. divaricata(Table 2), and they are distributed in a centripetal position, close to the vascular bundles (not shown). The KC mitochondria ofX. richteri, an NADP-ME-type C4species, which are also distributed in a centripetal position, are small (not shown) and similar in size to BS mitochondria ofS. genistoides,S. masenderanica,S. montana, andS. webbii(Table 2). Mitochondrial size (small diameter) in representativeSalsolas.l. speciesBS, bundle sheath cells around veins; KCL/KC, inner layer of Kranz-like or Kranz cells, M, mesophyll cells. Table 3shows results on the thickness of CWs of chlorenchyma cells where they are exposed to the intercellular air space (IS), the M and BS cells ofS. genistoides,S. masenderanica,S. montana, andS. webbii, the M cells and KLCs ofS. divaricata, and the M cells versus KCs of the C4speciesX. richteri. Among theSalsolaspecies, for thickness of BS cell/KLC/KC CWs exposed to the IS,S. divaricatahad the highest value (0.31 mum), which was 1.5- to 3-fold higher than that of the other species; while this value for the C4X. richteriwas much higher (2.9 mum). Thickness of cell walls in leaf cross-sections of representativeSalsolas.l. speciesBS, bundle sheath cells surrounding veins; KC, KLC, internal layer of Kranz or Kranz-like cells; IS, intercellular air space; M, mesophyll cell; WS, water storage cell. In each casen=15-30 measurements. Values are shown with standard errors. NoneForX. richteri, this layer represents specialized hypoderm. NoneForX. richteri, this layer could be also referred as M.(A) Thickness of individual cell walls of BS, KLC, or KC, M1 (or hypodermal cells inXylosalsola richteriand hypodermal-like inS. divaricata), or M2 cells when in contact with intercellular air space. (B) Combined thickness of cell walls where BS cells, KLCs, or KCs are in contact with other cells (M, WS, or an adjacent BS, KLC or KC). The thickness of CWs exposed to the IS is shown for the subepidermal M1 versus the inner M2 cells. In the M1 cells (which are specialized hypodermal cells inX. richteri), the thickness of the CWs exposed to the IS ranged between 0.11 mum and 0.20 mum, with the highest values inS. divaricataand the C4X. richteri. In three species,S. genistoides,S. divaricata, and C4X. richteri, the subepidermal M1 cells have thicker CWs than the M2 cells, being slightly thicker inS. genistoides, ~1.5 times thicker inX. richteri, and up to ~3 times thicker inS. divaricata. The thickness of M2 CWs exposed to the IS was similar and low among the species, ranging from 0.07 mum to 0.12 mum. Among the fiveSalsolaspecies, the combined thickness of the BS or KLC CWs in contact with other cells (M or BS/KLCs) ranged from 0.20 to 0.29, while in C4X. richterithese values for KCs in contact with M cells or other KCs were much higher (2.42 in contact with M cells and 0.97 mum in contact with other KCs). Among theSalsolaspecies, the combined thickness of the KLCs in contact with WS cells inS. divaricata(0.73 mum) was 2- to 6-fold higher than in otherSalsolaspecies; while the C4X. richterihad the highest value (1.52 mum). Immunoblots for Rubisco, and for key C4cycle enzymes PEPC, PPDK, NAD-ME, and NADP-ME from total soluble proteins extracted from leaves of the studied species are presented inFig. 5. The carboxylase of the C3pathway, Rubisco, analysed by western blots with the large subunit antibody, is abundant in all species. The C4speciesX. richteriandC. orientalehave very high labelling of the C4pathway enzymes, PEPC and PPDK, with difference in abundance of the two malic enzymes. Xylosalsola richterihas clear labelling for NADP-ME and lower labelling for NAD-ME, whileC. orientalehas strong labelling for NAD-ME, and no detectable labelling for NADP-ME. Compared with the two C4species, the fiveSalsolaspecies,S. genistoides,S. masenderanica,S. montana,S. webbii, andS. divaricata, have no labelling for the C4cycle enzymes PPDK and NADP-ME, very low labelling for PEPC, and to varying degrees less labelling for NAD-ME (lowest inS. webbii, highest inS. divaricata). Western blots for C4enzymes and Rubisco from soluble proteins extracted from leaves of fiveSalsolaspecies s.l.,Salsola genistoides,S. masenderanica,S. montana,S. webbii, andS. divaricata, and two C4Salsoloid-type species,Caroxylon orientaleandXylosalsola richteri. Blots were probed with antibodies raised against PEPC, PPDK, NAD-ME, NADP-ME, and Rubisco large subunit, respectively. Numbers on the left indicate the molecular mass in kiloDaltons. The focus of this study is on five species of the tribe Salsoleae (formerly classified under sectionCoccosalsola) where C3-type carbon isotope composition, and/or lack of Kranz-type anatomy has been recognized (see the Introduction). Leaves of plants ofS. genistoides,S. masenderanica,S. montana,S. webbii, andS. divaricatagrown in the current study have C3-type isotope composition with mean delta13C values between -22.60/00 and -29.70/00 (Table 4; see alsoTable 5for values for these species from previous reports). Comparative values for the C4speciesC. orientaleandX. richteriwere -13.50/00 to -12.10/00, respectively. Table 5is a summary of the carbon isotope composition of plant samples, and type of anatomy where known, of species in this group (combining the present analysis with some previous data). The results show that 18 species have C3-type isotope values (S. abrotanoides,S. arbusculiformis,S. botschantzevii,S. deschaseauxiana,S. divaricata,S. drobovii,S. genistoides,S. flexuosa,S. gymnomaschala,S. junatovii,S. laricifolia,S. lipschitzii,S. masenderanica,S. montana,S. oreophila,S. pachyphylla,S. tianshanica, andS. webbii) and 18 species have C4isotope values. Carbon isotope composition of leaf biomass (deltaNoneC) and CONonecompensation point () at 25 degrees C and 920 PPFD in representativeSalsolas.l. speciesAverage numbers of several measurements are presented; for delta13C individual numbers and sources, seeTable 5. Data on carbon isotope composition and leaf anatomy of species formerly classified underSalsolasectionCoccosalsolaSome species are placed in the informal clade 'Oreosalsola' based on morphological features (HA, unpublished); additional analysis by molecular phylogeny is needed. KAS, University of Kassel, Germany; LE, Herbarium of the Komarov Botanical Institute, Saint-Petersburg, Russia; MO, Herbarium of the Missouri Botanical Garden, St Louis, MO, USA; MW, Herbarium of the Moscow State University, Moscow, Russia; P, Herbarium of the Museum national d'Histoire naturelle, Paris, France; WSU, grown at the Washington State University, voucher specimen available at the WSU Marion Ownbey Herbarium, Pullman, WA, USA; Symp, Sympegmoid-type anatomy; Kranz-like Symp; Kranz-like Sympegmoid anatomy; Kranz-like Sals, Kranz-like Salsoloid anatomy; Sals, Salsoloid; +H, hypoderm is present; -H, hypoderm is absent. NoneInformation when available includes a listing of the herbarium, collector, specimen number, date, and country of origin. NoneSalsola euryphyllaBotsch. andS. transhyrcanicaare presumed to belong to theXylosalsolaclade, but have not been included in any phylogenetic analyses and do not have a combination as of yet inXylosalsola. Light and CO2response curves of photosynthesis were measured for comparison of theSalsolaspecies with the C4plantsC. orientaleandX. richteri. The light response curves measured under atmospheric levels of CO2(370 mumol mol-1) at 25 oC show that the C4speciesX. richteriandC. orientalehave increasing rates of CO2fixation up to 1400 PPFD, whereas the threeSalsolaspecies become light saturated at lower PPFD. The maximum rates of photosynthesis in the two C4species were higher than in theSalsolaspeciesS. masenderanica,S. montana(Fig. 6A),S. genistoides, andS. webbii(not shown). Maximum rates inS. divaricatawere closer to that of the C4species (Fig. 6A). Rates of CO2fixation in response to varying light intensity (A) and intercellular levels of CO2(B) in threeSalsolaspecies s.l.,S. masenderanica,S. montana, andS. divaricata, and two C4Salsoloid-type species,Caroxylon orientaleandXylosalsola richteri. The results show the average from measurements of the response to changes in light (from high to low), and CO2(from ambient to low, and low to high), from 2-4 separate measurements on branches from different plants. The values determined from CO2response curves at 25 oC, 920 PPFD, and atmospheric O2(21%) were 5.5 mubar and 5.8 mubar for the C4speciesC. orientaleandX. richteri. Among theSalsolaspecies,S. divaricatahad a low value (32.3 mubar), compared with an average value of ~50 mubar for three species (S. genistoides,S. webbii, andS. montana), whileS. mazenderanciahad a higher value (Table 4). Plots of CO2assimilation rates versus increasing intercellular levels of CO2show that the C4speciesX. richteriandC. orientalehave a rapid increase in rate approaching saturation at aCiof ~300 mubar CO2, whereasS. masenderanica,S. montana,S. divaricata(alsoS. genistoidesandS. webbii, not shown) had a C3-like response, with photosynthesis continuing to increase up to ~600 mubar CO2(Fig. 6B). In situimmunolabelling for GDC using the antibody to the P protein was examined by electron microscopy, and quantitative analysis made based on the density of gold particles, in four of theSalsolaspeciesS. masenderanica,S. montana,S. webbii, andS. divaricata, and compared with that in the C4speciesC. orientale. Analysis of the immunolabelling distribution shows that there is no significant difference in density of the gold particles between the mitochondria of M and BS cells inS. masenderanica,S. montana, andS. webbii(Fig. 7). In contrast, inS. divaricata, the number of gold particles is 7.5 times higher in the KLC compared with M mitochondria. In the C4speciesC. orientale, gold particles are also selectively localized in the KC mitochondria, with low labelling in M mitochondria (Fig. 7). Graphs showing quantitative data obtained from electron microscopy ofin situimmunolocalization of glycine decarboxylase (GDC) in mesophyll (M) versus bundle sheath (BS) ofSalsolaspecies s.l.,S. masenderanica,S. montana, andS. webbii, M versus Kranz-like cells (KLCs) ofS. divaricatain sectionCoccosalsola, and M versus Kranz cells (KCs) in the C4Salsoloid-type speciesCaroxylon orientale. The density of labelling (number of gold particles per mum2of mitochondrial area) for GDC in mitochondria in the chlorenchyma cell types is shown. For each cell type, 10-15 cell fragments were used for counting. The tree depicted inFig. 8shows the maximum likelihood phylogenetic analysis of tribe Salsoleae based on ITS sequence data. The colour coding shows species studied herein, belonging formerly to section 'Coccosalsola', including the fiveSalsolaspecies of interest (S. genistoides,S. masenderanica,S. montana,S. webbii, andS. divaricata),S. arbusculiformis,S. laricifolia, and the C4speciesX. richteri,X. arbuscula, andX. chivensis,S. foliosaandS. zygophylla; and, in addition, three other species (Salsola'touranica',Sympegma regelii, andRaphidophyton regelii). All of these, other than the C4species, are known to be species with C3-type isotope composition and/or non-Kranz anatomy. The positions of the two known C3-C4intermediates are highlighted (blue). The results found here closely reflect the results of previous studies (Akhani et al., 2007;Wen et al., 2010). This is the first study to find strong support forS. webbiiandS. genistoidesforming a grade withSympegmaleading to the rest of the tribe. Maximum likelihood phylogram of relationships in tribes Salsoleae and Caroxyloneae. Numbers at nodes reflect bootstrap percentages greater than 50%. Genera are abbreviated as:A.,Anabasis;C.,Climacoptera;Ca. ,Caroxylon;Co.,Cornulaca;Cy. ,Cyatobasis;G.;Girgensohnia;H.;Halothamnus;Halo. ,Halogeton;Halox. ,Haloxylon;Ham. ,Hammada;Ho.,Horaninowia;I.,Iljinia;K.,Kaviria;N.,Noaea;O.,Ofaiston;Pe.,Petrosimonia;R.,Rhaphidophyton;S.,Salsola;Sy.,Sympegma;T.,Turania;Tr.,Traganum;X.,Xylosalsola. The colour coding shows species from section 'Coccosalsola' plusS. touranica, Sy. regelii, andR. regelii. The species boxed in blue are known C3-C4intermediates in tribe Salsoleae. The species boxed in yellow have non-Kranz-type leaf anatomy and/or C3-type carbon isotope composition (includingS. webbii,S. genistoides,S. montana,andS. masenderanicain the present study;S. laricifoliaputative intermediate based on structure but not functionally tested). The species boxed in pink are C4species from concept sectionCoccosalsola. The remaining species are C4. Currently most knownSalsolaspecies having C3-like values of carbon isotope composition occur in what was originally described as sectionCoccosalsola(Botschantzev, 1976,1985,1989). Among the fiveSalsolaspecies in this study,S. masenderanicaandS. montana(together with previously studiedS. arbusculiformis) belong to subsectionArbusculae,S. genistoidesandS. webbiibelong to subsectionGenistoides, andS. divaricatabelongs to subsectionCoccosalsola(Botschantzev, 1976,1985). However, according to nuclear and chloroplast sequence data, these species do not form a monophyletic group and the following informal clade names were applied to the distinct lineages: 'Collinosalsola' forS. arbusculiformis, 'Oreosalsola' forS. masenderanicaandS. montana, and 'Canarosalsola' forS. divaricata(Akhani et al., 2007) (Table 6). The position ofS. genistoidesandS. webbiiin the phylogenetic tree clearly suggests that they also do not belong toSalsola sensu stricto (s.s.); geographically, they are from the Mediterranean area. Salsola genistoidesprefers arid south hill slopes; this species is an endemic of Spanish provinces Almeria, Murcia, and Alicante along the Iberian Peninsula. Salsola webbiiis distributed on the alkaline soils of sunny arid slopes of coastal mountains in Morocco and Spain (Castroviejo and Luceno, 1990). Salsola masenderanicaandS. montanaare distributed through the Irano-Turanian area, butS. montanaalso occurs in the lower montane zone of the Central Asian area. Salsola montanaoften grows in gypsum, marl, calcareous, and slightly salty soils (Akhani and Ghasemkhani, 2007), andS. masenderanicaoccurs in similar habitats in Alborz Mount. Salsola divaricatais an endemic species from the Canary Islands, which grows in semi-arid rocky zones near coastal areas (Fritzsch and Brandes, 1999;Delgado et al., 2006; and observation by HA). Most other species having C3-type carbon isotope composition in Salsoleae, together with the previously identified C3-C4intermediate speciesS. arbusculiformis, are distributed throughout the Irano-Turanian and Central Asian areas, often on slopes of hills. In formerly sectionCoccosalsola, the C4species which have been previously studied are NADP-ME type with Salsoloid-type Kranz anatomy (see the scheme inPyankov et al., 1997). They occur almost continuously in arid and semi-arid zones of the Mediterranean, N African, SW and Central Asian areas. Summary of known types of photosynthesis in species of formerlySalsolasectionCoccosalsola(includingS. botschantzeviiand species added in Botchantzev, 1989)A, anatomy; CI, carbon isotope composition; P, physiology. NoneSalsola euryphyllaBotsch. andS. transhyrcanicaare presumed to belong to theXylosalsolaclade, but have not been included in any phylogenetic analyses and do not have a combination as of yet inXylosalsola. Gas exchange analyses of the fiveSalsolaspecies shows thatS. genistoides,S. masenderanica,S. montana,S. webbii, andS. divaricataare not functioning as C4plants since photosynthesis is saturated at lower light levels, and higher levels of CO2are required for saturation compared with the two representative C4Salsoloideae species. An important functional test for whether a species may be functioning as a C3-C4intermediate is the CO2compensation point, since values lower than that of C3plants are indicative of a reduction in photorespiration (Edwards and Ku, 1987). Previously,S. arbusculiformiswas identified as the first C3-C4intermediate in family Chenopodiaceace; at 25 degrees C it has a value of 36.7 mubar compared with 5 mubar for the C4speciesX. arbuscula(Voznesenskaya et al., 2001). C3plants have minimum values of ~45 ppm at 25 degrees C and 21% O2, which is similar to that predicted from kinetic properties of spinach Rubisco (Woodrow and Berry, 1988). In the present study,S. divaricatahas a lower than expected value (32 mubar) suggestive of a C3-C4intermediate. Values ofS. genistoides,S. montana, andS. webbiiwere within the range expected of C3plants (46-53 mubar); while the value was higher inS. masenderanica(74.9 mubar). At a given temperature, higher than predicted can occur depending on the rate of dark-type respiration relative to the rate of CO2assimilation (Furbank et al., 2009). In C3-C4intermediates, the proof of compartmentation to support refixation of photorespired CO2, and intermediate-type values comes from analysis by immunolocalization of GDC levels in BS/KLC versus M mitochondria (Rawsthorne et al., 1988;Voznesenskaya et al., 2001). Salsola divaricata, like the C4speciesC. orientale, has selective compartmentation of GDC in KLC mitochondria, as shown by quantifying the number of gold particles from immunolocalization, while inS. masenderanica,S. montana, andS. webbiithe labelling is nearly equal in both BS and M mitochondria. Thus,S. divaricata, together withS. arbusculiformis, is the second intermediate to be identified in family Chenopodiaceae, a family that has been found to contain the most C4species among the dicots. The carbon isotope composition of biomass is a means of analysing whether species are directly fixing atmospheric CO2via Rubisco or via PEPC in C4photosynthesis. In C3plants, Rubisco discriminates against fixing atmospheric13CO2(resulting in more negative delta13C isotope values), which is prevented or minimized in C4plants where atmospheric CO2is delivered to Rubisco in BS cells via the C4cycle. Previous studies showed that delta13C values for C4plants are between -100/00 and -150/00. Typical delta13C values for C3species are -240/00 to -300/00, but values in C3plants can become a few 0/00 more positive (e.g. -210/00 to -220/00) in plants growing in arid conditions, where water stress can cause photosynthesis to be more limiting due to increased diffusive resistance (Cerling, 1999). Analyses of the carbon isotope composition of theSalsolaspecies in this study show that they have C3-type values (average ranging from -22.60/00 inS. montanato -29.70/00 inS. genistoides) compared with the C4-type values ofX. richteriandC. orientale(-12.10/00 and -13.50/00, respectively). Analyses from gas exchange (including ), compartmentation of GDC between M and BS cells, and carbon isotope composition of biomass indicate thatS. masenderanica,S. montana,S. webbii, andS. genistoidesare functioning like C3species. Salsola divaricatais a C3-C4intermediate based on its reduced , the selective localization of GDC in mitochondria of the KLCs, and other structural features. If intermediates fix atmospheric CO2via Rubisco with discrimination against fixation of13CO2in M cells, and reduce by refixing photorespired CO2in KLCs (Type I), their carbon isotope composition will be like that of C3plants; whereas, if they reduce photorespiration via a partially functioning C4cycle which does not discriminate against13CO2(Type II), the isotope composition is expected to have an intermediate value (Edwards and Ku, 1987). The C3-type isotope value ofS. divaricata(delta13C = -29.20/00) indicates that it is functioning as a type I intermediate. The low expression of C4cycle enzymes in this species is similar to that of the four C3species (S. genistoides,S. masenderanica,S. montana, andS. webbii, seeFig. 5) which suggests it has little or no capacity for C4function. In type I intermediates, any glycolate which is formed as a consequence of ribulose bisphosphate (RuBP) oxygenase activity in M cells will be metabolized in the glycolate pathway with generation of CO2via GDC in the KLCs. The will be reduced to the extent photorespired CO2is refixed by the KLC chloroplasts. These intermediates have an advantage photosynthetically over C3species by refixation of photorespired CO2when CO2levels are limiting. Results from this study on carbon isotope composition in species of the formerly recognized sectionCoccosalsolashow that 18 species have C3-type delta13C values (from -20.40/00 to -30.7 0/00). Two of these,S. arbusculiformisandS. divaricata, have now been shown to be C3-C4intermediates. In subfamily Salsoloideae, most species are C4plants with Salsoloid-type Kranz anatomy, including the NAD-ME-typeC. orientaleand the NADP-ME-typeX. richteriin this study (see the Introduction). In tribe Salsoleae, species lacking Kranz anatomy have previously been defined as having Sympegmoid-type leaf structure, with two well-developed layers of photosynthetic M cells and indistinctive BS cells having few chloroplasts. However, among the fiveSalsolaspecies in the current study, along with the C3-C4intermediateS. arbusculiformis, all of which have C3-type carbon isotope composition, there are significant differences. Three of these species (S. genistoides,S. masenderanica, andS. webbii), which functionally are C3, have classical Sympegmoid-type anatomy with equally developed M1 and M2 photosynthetic cells, and indistinct BS cells. The BS cells have very few organelles, with chloroplasts and mitochondria distributed around the cells without any special positioning. Salsola montanaalso has Sympegmoid-type anatomy with quantitative features of M and BS cells similar to the above species. This includes M1 and M2 cells having equal lengths and widths (Fig. 2B,F;Supplementary Table S1atJXBonline; see also light micrograph inAkhani and Ghasemkhani, 2007). However,S. montanahas greater development of organelles in BS cells, and the mitochondria are arranged along the inner or radial CW. This structural feature of BS cells occurs in all C3-C4intermediates which have been studied. Thus,S. montanais classified as a proto-Kranz species, which is defined as a species exhibiting early development of a C4trait in BS cells, while functionally exhibiting C3-type photosynthetic features. Proto-Kranz species have been found in a few genera in other families and they have been recognized as C3relatives in lineages having C3-C4intermediate species (Muhaidat et al., 2011;Khoshravesh et al., 2012;Sage et al., 2012). In the BS cells ofS. montana, some of the photorespired CO2from GDC, as a consequence of RuBP oxygenase activity in the BS chloroplasts, may be refixed (see discussion of proto-Kranz,Muhaidat et al., 2011). However, the effect on would probably be small and very difficult to detect from gas exchange analysis, since the dual layers of M cells inS. montanaaccount for most of the photosynthetic tissue (Fig. 2B,F;Supplementary Table S2), and dark-type respiration is also a component of . The C3-C4intermediatesS. divaricata(current study) andS. arbusculiformis(Voznesenskaya et al., 2001) have some features of Kranz-like anatomy. The cells of the outer M1 layer are much shorter and appear more like the hypodermal cells (if present) in C4Salsoloideae species. A similar trend can be seen in leaf cross-sections ofS. laricifolia(Wen and Zhang, 2011). Also,S. droboviiwhich has C3carbon isotope composition, represents another structural variant with a complete elimination of the outer M layer; it has only two layers of chlorenchyma characteristic of species with C4photosynthesis, M and KC (or KLC in this case; NKK and EVV, unpublished data). InS. divaricata, the layer of KLCs contains chloroplasts and numerous large mitochondria which are characteristic for other species with C3-C4intermediate features (Edwards and Ku, 1987;Rawsthorne and Bauwe, 1998;Voznesenskaya et al., 2007,2010;Muhaidat et al., 2011), includingS. arbusculiformis(Voznesenskaya et al., 2001). The positioning of mitochondria inS. divaricatatowards the inner CW is characteristic of all C3-C4intermediates. Also, compared with the other fourSalsolaspecies in the current study,S. divaricatahas some thickening of the CW of KLCs especially facing the intercellular space and adjacent to the WS tissue, a feature observed in Salsoloid anatomy, and a characteristic of many C4species which is considered to provide resistance to leakage of CO2from the KCs (von Caemmerer and Furbank, 2003). InS. divaricata, the layer of KLCs is continuous around the leaf as in C4Salsolaspecies. A similar arrangement of KLCs containing a visible layer of cytoplasm with organelles can also be seen inS. laricifolia(see fig. 13 inWen and Zhang, 2011) andS. drobovii(EVV and NKK, unpublished), suggestive that they may functionally be a C3-C4intermediate. In the otherSalsolaspecies in the current study (S. genistoides,S. masenderanica, andS. webbii), the BS cells adjacent to the small peripheral veins are represented by non-specialized parenchyma cells. InS. masenderanicaandS. montana, they are similar to that observed previously for the C3speciesS. oreophila(Pyankov et al., 1997) and the C3-C4intermediateS. arbusculiformis(Voznesenskaya et al., 2001), except for the difference in the number of organelles, with a higher number inS. arbusculiformisandS. montana, especially in the outermost BS cells occurring exactly above the vascular bundle. From quantitative analysis, differences in the size and volume densities of tissues were identified between the M and BS cells of C3species (S. genistoides,S. masenderanica,S. montana, andS. webbii), the M cells and KLCs of the C3-C4intermediatesS. arbuculiformisandS. divaricata, and the M cells and KCs of representative C4species (Supplementray Table S1atJXBonline). The results show that the anatomy of the C3-C4intermediateS. arbuculiformisis similar to that of the four C3Salsolaspecies, with the exception that the intermediate has much smaller M1 cells, and more distinctive BS cells due to more numerous organelles. BothS. arbusculiformisandS. divaricatahave smaller M1 cells and a larger investment in WS tissue than the C3species. The intermediateS. divaricatais unlike the C3species and the intermediateS. arbusculiformis, and rather like the C4species in having a lower volume density of M cells, a lower M/KLC ratio indicating an increased investment in KLCs, along with the Salsoloid-like anatomy. C4species are considered to have evolved from C3ancestors. Based on the structural and functional differences between theSalsolaspecies in this study, the previously identified C3-C4intermediateS. arbusculiformis, and the C4species with Salsoloid-type anatomy, the following sequential structural and functional progression in evolution from C3to C4(or backward regression of C4) is proposed (Fig. 9). Pre-conditioning for evolution of Salsoloid-type anatomy is increased succulence in C3species having Sympegmoid-type anatomy by adaptation to hot/dry climates and development of specialized WS tissue (Fig. 9A). In this study, the fraction of leaf tissue invested in WS tissue was lower in the C3species, with the lowest values inS. genistoidesandS. webbiiwhich are proposed to represent the ancestral condition for the otherSalsolaspecies. A model illustrating five conceptual phases of evolution of C4Salsoloid-type anatomy, having a single compound Kranz unit, from C3Sympegmoid-type anatomy. Similar events might take place during reversions from C4. Additional abbreviations: F, functional type; cp, centripetal, indicating positioning of organelles towards the inner BS, KLC, KC wall; mito, mitochondria. Colours: chloroplasts (green, dark green in KC in C4), mitochondria (orange with GDC; dark brown without GDC). C3-type photosynthesis was shown by functional analyses for threeSalsolaspecies (S. genistoides,S. masenderanica, andS. webbii) which have Sympegmoid-type anatomy with two layers of photosynthetic tissue, M1 and M2, and with BS cells adjacent to veins having few organelles. For these three species, and especially forS. genistoidesandS. webbii, the non-specialized BS cells, having only a few chloroplasts, contribute to the WS tissue rather than as chlorenchyma. The first proposed step towards development of Kranz anatomy is represented by the development of proto-Kranz features inS. montana(Fig. 9B). It has Sympegmoid-type anatomy; but, compared with the above species, it has an increase in the organelle number in BS cells and positioning of the mitochondria towards the inner BS CW. As in C3species, GDC is expressed equally in M and BS mitochondria, there is no thickening of the BS cell walls, and functionally it has C3traits. Also, the quantitative features of M and BS cells, and volume density of tissues inS. montanaare similar to those of the other C3species. The next steps in evolution involve establishment of the C3-C4intermediate characters with Kranz-like anatomy (i.e. S. arbusculiformisandS. divaricata). This includes reduction of photosynthetic investment in M1 and an increased investment of development of KLCs. In the intermediates, the M1 cells appear more like the WS hypodermal layer found in some C4Salsoloid species, which suggests an evolutionary progression from M1 to hypoderm by reducing the cell length and organelle number. This could occur either by transforming the M1 cells to hypodermal cells, or by loss of the M1 layer (Salsoloid anatomy with and without a hypoderm, respectively). There is selective compartmentation of GDC to KLC mitochondria together with their enlargement, and the thickening of the KLC CWs which could decrease the loss of CO2from the KLC, and reduce by refixing photorespired CO2in KLC. The C3-C4intermediateS. arbusculiformishas Kranz-like Sympegmoid anatomy with a discontinuous layer of KLCs which surround the separate vascular bundles. The anatomy is similar to that of the proto-Kranz speciesS. montanawhich has a large number of organelles in the BS cells. The main difference is thatS. arbusculiformishas smaller M1 cells, and the KLCs are specialized for selective decarboxylation of glycine in photorespiration (Fig. 9C). An important further step is development of a continuous layer of KLCs under the layer of M, as seen in the intermediateS. divaricatawith Kranz-like Salsoloid anatomy (Fig. 9D). Having the structural development of Kranz anatomy with one layer of M chlorenchyma around the leaf periphery, with an underlying layer of small rounded KLCs, the final development of functional C4photosynthesis occurs by conversion of M1 to WS hypoderm and expression of the C4cycle between M and KCs, and selective expression of the C3cycle in the KC chloroplasts (Fig. 9E). This proposed development of Salsoloid-type C4based on physiological and structural features of the species studied has in common some of the previously proposed biochemical modifications and steps in the progression from C3to C4photosynthesis (Edwards and Ku, 1987;Christin et al., 2011;Sage et al., 2012). In the model bySage et al. (2012), which involves five phases, an important initial step is structural pre-conditioning of C3plants for closer positioning of veins and decreased numbers of M cells between veins as an adaptation to dry climates. Also, an important event is the enlargement of BS cells around the vascular tissue and reduction of the M/BS ratio. However, in this model, the structural changes were described for species having flat leaves and anatomy with so-called multiple simple Kranz units around individual veins according to the classification ofPeter and Katinas (2003). C4Salsoloideae species have a single compound Kranz unit with all veins located inside the continuous double chlorenchyma layers. Analysis of patterns of venation in different types ofSalsolaspecies indicates that the type of photosynthesis and evolution to C4is not dependent on peripheral vein density; rather vein density is a species-specific character. Differences in vein density may reflect species-specific adaptations which depend on the environment and availability of water. Crucial events in the evolution of Salsoloid-type anatomy is a decrease in the layers of M cells and a significant increase in the number, but not the size of the KLCs or KCs. It is important to recognize that the current phylogenetic hypothesis (Fig. 8) does not suggest that the different stages described here represent a direct progression, in a phylogenetic sense, among the species described. Instead, it is suggested that the species described here represent different stages of progression in this model in parallel. One of the difficulties in the current study is that there is insufficient clarity in phylogenetic relationships, particularly in contrast to the patterns found inMollugo(Christin et al., 2011), to test the number and precise direction of changes in the Salsoleae. While recognizing the basal position of C3,Sympegma,Salsola genistoides, andS. webbii, species with intermediate features may represent either a progression in evolution of C4traits from C3ancestors or reversions from C4. In a treatment of representativeSalsolaspecies byPyankov et al. (2001None), species lacking Kranz anatomy were distributed between two large branches within the tribe Salsoleae; one branch included mostly C4species with NAD-ME-type biochemistry and Salsoloid anatomy (together with several species having Sympegmoid-type anatomy, e.g. S. oreophila,S. botschantzevii, andS. drobovii), and another branch including NADP-ME-type species with Salsoloid anatomy (together with species lacking Kranz anatomy, e.g. S. arbusculiformisandS. montana). In a more detailed phylogeny, it was shown that the C4species with NAD-ME biochemistry belong to the tribe Caroxyloneae and the NADP-ME species belong to Salsoleae s.s. (Akhani et al., 2007). Furthermore, the results of that study show that sectionCoccosalsolais not monophyletic; C4species fall into two clades, the C4species of subsectionCoccosalsolabelong to the clade representingSalsola s.s. while the C4species of subsectionArbusculaewere renamed to the genusXylosalsolain tribe Salsoleae (sensuAkhani et al., 2007). Based on the analysis of one nuclear and one chloroplastic gene region (ITS and chloroplastpsbB-psbH), sequences in phylogenetic schemes show thatS. masenderanicaandS. montanaare very closely related species forming a clade withS. arbusculiformis,Rhaphydophyton, andNoaea, whileS. divaricataforms an independent clade which is related to other C4species (Akhani et al., 2007). A close relationship between C3S. montanaandS. masenderanica, the known C3-C4intermediateS. arbusculiformis, andS. laricifoliais further supported by the maximum likelihood tree derived from ITS,psbB-psbH, andrbcL sequences (Wen et al., 2010). Similarly, a clade ofS. montanaandS. masenderanicais shown grouping withS. arbusculiformis(C3-C4intermediate) andS. laricifolia, along with C4species ofNoaeaandS. rosacea. Salsola laricifolia, has a C3-type isotope value (Table 5);Wen and Zhang (2011)suggested that this may be a C3-C4intermediate based on it having a well-developed layer of KLCs. The C3-C4speciesS. divaricatacontinues to be a lineage isolated from any of the other C3or C3-C4intermediate species; however, better resolution and support will be necessary to clarify this. Botschantzev (1976,1985) consideredS. montanaLitv.,S. masenderanicaBotsch.,S. oreophilaBotsch., andS. botschantzeviiKurbanov to be separate species; later,Freitag and Rilke (1997)suggested that they all are synonyms forS. montanaLitw. s.l.). However, ITS sequence data and anatomical differences given herein demonstrate at least the distinctness ofS. montanaandS. masenderanica. The distinctness of the other possible segregates ofS. montanawill require further study. The evolutionary relationships of the Sympegmoid- and Salsoloid-type anatomies and gradations in between in tribe Salsoleae are still unclear. While a model for evolution from C3to C4developed from structural and physiological analysis has been proposed here, the model needs to be evaluated with a more robust phylogenetic hypothesis, which will require additional sequence data and species sampling. Earlier,Carolin et al. (1975)proposed that Sympegmoid anatomy evolved from Salsoloid, which is consistent with the suggestion ofPyankov et al. (1997,2001None) that some C3Sympegmoid-typeSalsolaspecies, for example those occurring at higher elevations, may be reversions from C4species. However,Akhani et al. (1997)supported the idea that Salsoloid-type C4evolved from species having Sympegmoid-type anatomy; interestingly,S. webbii,S. genistoides, andSympegma regeliiform a grade leading to the rest of the Salsoleae (Fig. 8), which is consistent with this hypothesis. Similar positioning ofS. webbiiandS. genistoideshas been previously suggested byKadereit et al. (2003)andKadereit and Freitag (2011), but with many fewer Salsoleae species sampled and with some variation in their precise position depending on the analysis. Here strong support is found for these species forming a grade at the base of the Salsoleae s.s. The phylogenetic patterns suggest that the ancestral species in Salsoleae are C3taxa such asSympegma regelii(a Central Asian plant) andSalsola genistoidesandS. webbii(two Iberian species). However, the C3-C4intermediates and other C3species are all intertwined with C4clades (Fig. 8). It is therefore not clear whether there have been many origins of C4in this clade, or if in some cases these have been reversions from C4. In the latter case, reversions from C4to intermediate to C3might occur by a gain of function of M cell chloroplasts to carry out C3photosynthesis by Rubisco, followed by a loss of this function in the KCs, accompanied by reversal of the structural features illustrated inFig. 9. Further analysis will be necessary to determine the directions of change in photosynthetic pathways in this lineage. In the future, more detailed physiological and anatomical evaluations of allSalsola s.l. species with C3carbon isotope values are needed to determine whether they are C3or intermediates, along with phylogenetic analysis to consider how C4photosynthesis evolved in tribe Salsoleae. Supplementary data are available atJXBonline. Appendix S1. Sampling table for phylogenetic analysis. Table S1. Mesophyll cell (M1, M2), hypodermal cell (H), bundle sheath cell (BS), Kranz-like cell (KLC), and Kranz cell (KC) sizes ofSalsolas.l. species. Table S2. Volume density of tissues (%) and ratios of M/BS in C3, M/KLC in C3-C4, and M/KC in C4species of representativeSalsola s.l.