Dramatic increases in the rates of chemical transformation by enzymes, compared with the uncatalyzed reactions in solution, result primarily from reductions in activation barriers within enzyme active sites. However, enzyme reaction mechanisms include other steps that have important consequences in determining efficacy. A simplified enzymatic reaction scheme is shown in eq1, in which E' represents one or more inactive states of the enzyme, E is the conformation of the enzyme competent for binding substrate, I is an inhibitor or transition-state analog, S1and S2are substrates or cofactors, which may bind in random or ordered (upper branch) fashion, the asterisk denotes the catalytically competent enzyme-substrate Michaelis complex, P is the product, andkcatis the catalytic rate constant. NoneNoneKinetic rate constants for other steps are omitted for clarity. The transition E' - greater than E may be bimolecular, in which binding of an allosteric regulator shifts the equilibrium from inactive to active states. If some states E' are not completely inactive, then total reactivity is averaged over multiple (partially) active conformations (not shown). Product release might involve multiple release steps for products and cofactors. Proteins are not single unique structures but interconvert over time scales from femtoseconds to seconds or longer between thermodynamically allowed alternate conformations. NMR spectroscopy allows detailed characterization of the extent and time scales of protein conformational fluctuations linked to numerous stages of complex enzymatic reaction mechanisms, such as that shown in eq1. NMR spectroscopic phenomena sensitive to time-dependent structural changes in proteins include laboratory frame spin relaxation,Nonerelaxation dispersion or line shapes,None,Noneparamagnetic relaxation enhancement (PRE),Noneresidual dipolar coupling (RDC),Noneand hydrogen-deuterium exchange (HX). None,NoneThis Account focuses on solution NMR laboratory-frame spin relaxation and relaxation dispersion, which uniquely provide information on both distributions of conformations and time scales for interconversion between states. Laboratory-frame spin-relaxation rate constants most commonly are interpreted using the model-free formalism spectral density function:NoneNoneNonein which taumis the overall rotational correlation time of the molecule, 1/tau = 1/taum+ 1/taue, andS2and taueare the square of the generalized order parameter and effective internal correlation time, respectively, describing the stochastic motions of the principal axis of an axially symmetric interaction tensor in a molecular reference frame. The definition of tau shows that laboratory-frame relaxation is sensitive to processes with taue less than = taum, typically picosecond-nanosecond for proteins studied by solution NMR spectroscopy. S2is a function of the equilibrium distribution of orientations of the interaction tensor in an internal reference frame:NoneNonein whichY2None(Omega) are spherical harmonic functions and ?? denotes an ensemble average over the probability distribution that the principal axis of the tensor is oriented with angles Omega = {theta, phi}. The order parameter satisfies 0 less than =S2 less than = 1, with the limits reached for fully disordered or completely rigid states, respectively. The model-free formalism and its extensionsNone,Nonehave been widely applied, for example, to dipole-dipole relaxation of1H,13C, and15N spins, in which the dipole tensor is oriented along the bond vector between a pair of covalently bonded atoms (such as the15N-1HNamide group in proteins), or2H spins, in which the quadrupole tensor is oriented along the covalent bond to the2H atom. NoneLaboratory-frame relaxation rate constants, notably the longitudinal relaxation rate constant,R1, the transverse relaxation rate constant,R2, and the heteronuclear Overhauser cross-relaxation rate constant, sigma, are linear combinations ofJ(omega) at eigenfrequencies omega of the nuclear spin Hamiltonian. NoneValues of the model-free parameters are obtained by numerical fitting of eq2to a set of experimentally determined relaxation rate constants. NoneKinetic processes on microsecond-millisecond time scales are termed chemical or conformational exchange in NMR spectroscopy and affect resonance line shapes and transverse relaxation rate constants. NoneLine shapes, measured from one- or multidimensional spectra, and relaxation-dispersion measurements, performed using Carr-Purcell-Meiboom-Gill orR1rhotechniques,None,Noneare analyzed using the Bloch-McConnell equations incorporating the resonance frequencies and "exchange-free" relaxation rate constants of spins in the different states and the kinetic rate constants for interconversion between states. One expression for theR1rhorelaxation rate constant for two interconverting states A and B is given byNone,NoneNoneNonein whichR1andR20are the relaxation rate constants in the absence of chemical exchange,Rexis the exchange contribution toR2, theta = arctan(omega1/Omega) is the tilt angle of the effective field in the rotating frame of reference, omega1is the field strength of the spin-locking field applied with radiofrequency omegarf, Deltaomega = OmegaB- OmegaAis the resonance frequency difference for a spin in states with offset frequencies OmegaAand OmegaB, omegaA,B2= OmegaA,B2+ omega12, Omega is the population-averaged resonance offset, omegae2= Omega2+ omega12,kex=k1+k-1,k1andk-1are the kinetic rate constants for transition from state A to B or vice versa, andpA? pBare the site populations of the two states. Relaxation dispersion profiles, obtained by measuringR1rhoas a function of omegae, potentially yieldkex,pA,pB, and Deltaomega; however, if kinetics approach the fast-exchange limit (kex? Deltaomega), then omegaAomegaB/omegae- greater than omegaeand onlypApBDeltaomega2andkexcan be determined. An expression for the free-precessionR2is obtained by setting theta = pi/2 and omegaAomegaB/omegae= Deltaomega:NoneNoneand is estimated by line shape analysis, extrapolating a relaxation-dispersion profile to the omegae- greater than 0 intercept, or Hahn spin-echo experiments. NoneSolution NMR studies that illustrate particular steps in the reaction scheme (eq1) are highlighted for three enzymes, ribonuclease HI (EC 3.1.26.4, RNase H), AlkB (EC 1.14.11.33), and triosephosphate isomerase (EC 5.3.1.1, TIM), that have been studied in my laboratory. Examples of other enzymes that illustrate similar principles include adenylateNone-Noneand other kinases,None-Nonechorismate mutase,Nonedihydrofolate reductase,None-NoneHIV protease,None-Noneprolyl isomerases,None-Noneand ribonuclease A. NoneNotably, spin-relaxation techniques have been applied to protein enzyme systems with masses greater than 200 kDa. NoneAs shown in eq1, interconversion between one or more inactive conformations, E', and the conformation competent for binding substrate, E, determines the equilibrium population of active enzyme. In the simplest model with a single conformation E', the apparent Michaelis constant becomesKm'=Km(1 + [E']/[E]). Thus, increased populations of E' reduce the apparent affinity of the substrate for the enzyme. RNase H enzymes are endonucleases that nonspecifically cleave the RNA strand of RNA:DNA hybrid duplex oligonucleotides. Figure1A shows the X-ray crystal structure of apoEscherichia coliRNase H (ecRNH) superposed with theHomo sapiensRNase H domain (hsRNH) in complex with substrate. The complex structure identifies three regions important for substrate binding: the loop between beta1and beta2(residues 11-22 in ecRNH), alphaCand the loop between alphaCand alphaD(termed the handle region, residues 81-101), and the loop between beta5and alphaE(residues 121-127). Superposition of the holo hsRNH and apo ecRNH structures indicates that all three regions differ in structure between the two proteins, implying that conformational rearrangement is required for the bacterial enzyme to achieve a productive enzyme-substrate complex. Autoinhibition of RNase H.None,None(A) Superposition of the ecRNH structure (light blue, PDB ID 2RN2) with the substrate-bound complex of the hsRNH protein (purple; PDB ID 2QK9), illustrating the position of the handle region interacting with the (yellow) DNA strand of the DNA:RNA hybrid substrate. (B) Backbone amide15NS2(ecRNH residue numbering is used throughout this figure). (top) Experimental (black) and predicted (blue)S2for ecRNH. (bottom) Experimental (black) and predicted (red)S2for ttRNH. Helices B and C and the handle region are highlighted in green. Experimental values are rescaled by linear regression to the simulated values for visualization. (C)R1rhorelaxation dispersion for backbone amide15N nuclei. Trp90R2(omegae) is shown for (top left) ecRNH and (bottom left) ttRNH at 300 K. Closed and open symbols represent data collected at 11.7 and 18.8 T, respectively. Backbone amide15NRexat 300 K, 14.1 T for (top right) ecRNH and (bottom right) ttRNH. Values ofRex greater than = 2.5 s-1are indicated by open circles. (D) (top) Representative conformations from an ecRNH MD trajectory of the (blue) open and (brown) closed states, illustrating the Cartesian W85-Calpha-A93-Calpha distance metric used to distinguish open (?11.5 A) and closed conformations (?8.5 A). The location of Trp90 also is shown. (bottom) Temperature dependence of ecRNH and ttRNH conformational distributions, illustrating the relative populations of the closed and open handle-region states at (blue) 273 K, (black) 300 K, and (red) 340 K. Values of the distance metric from ecRNH and ttRNH (PDB ID 1RIL) crystal structures are shown as green diamonds. (E) Kinetic scheme for the interaction of substrate with the handle region of RNase H, in which the closed and open states are incompetent and competent for binding, respectively. Panel C is from ref (38); other panels are from ref (39). A combination of laboratory-frame spin relaxation (Figure1B),Nonerelaxation dispersion measurements (Figure1C),Noneand molecular dynamics (MD) simulations (Figure1D)Nonehave led to a model for the contribution of the handle region to activity for homologous ribonuclease H enzymes from mesophilic (ecRNH) and thermophilic (Thermus thermophilus; ttRNH) bacteria. All three regions involved in substrate recognition show reduced order parameters in the apo enzymes, indicating a broader distribution of amide bond vector orientations on picosecond-nanosecond time scales, compared with elements of secondary structure (Figure1B). The order parameters are recapitulated in a series of 100 ns MD simulations, which have been independently validated through chemical shift calculations. NoneRelaxation dispersion and Hahn spin-echo experiments (Figure1C) demonstrate that the handle region of these enzymes undergoes conformational exchange with similar values ofkex= ?4 * 104s-1, with the minor state of ttRNH populated at a level ?3-fold greater than for ecRNH. The NMR experiments, because the exchange process is fast on the chemical shift time scale, do not provide information on the structures of the sparsely populated states. MD simulations (Figure1D) suggest that the handle region transiently occupies two conformational states. The population distributions derived from MD simulations at three temperatures indicate that the major state is a more open conformation and minor state is a more closed conformation in ecRNH and that the converse is true for ttRNH. These data support a model in which the closed state is inhibitory to binding of substrate. The small fraction of the closed state, ?1-3%, present at equilibrium of theE. coliprotein has negligible effect onKm', whereas the larger fraction of the closed state, ?90-97%, present for ttRNH is predicted to increaseKm'substantially, consistent with an ?8-fold increase inKmbetween the ecRNH and ttRNH enzymes at 303 K. Thus, as shown in Figure1E, substrate forms an initial interaction with the open handle region conformation followed by closure of the loop in a two-step binding process. A subfamily of RNases H, including hsRNH andChlorobium tepidumRNase H, appear to bind substrate in a single step, because altered interactions resulting from a single mutation to aspartate at position 88 props the handle region in a "semi-open" conformation. NoneEnzymes that bind multiple substrates or cofactors may require specific orders of addition, so that S2has lower affinity than S1to E in eq1, ensuring that the upper pathway dominates over the lower pathway. If S2completely blocks access to the binding site for S1, the apparent Michaelis constant becomesKm'=Km(1 + [S2]/K2), in whichK2is the equilibrium constant for binding of S2to E. Consequently, S2acts as a competitive inhibitor of the free enzyme E.Escherichia coliAlkB is an Fe(II)/2-oxoglutarate (2OG)-dependent dioxygenase enzyme that repairs damage to DNA or RNA bases caused by SN2-alkylating agents. None,NoneThe reaction mechanism requires that the cofactor Fe(II) and the cosubstrate 2-oxoglutarate (2OG) bind to the enzyme prior to the alkylated nucleotide primary substrate, as confirmed by X-ray crystal structures in which the bound primary substrate occludes the binding sites for Fe(II) and 2OG (Figure2A). NoneIn the first, oxygen-dependent chemical step, an oxyferryl intermediate is generated by decarboxylation of 2OG to succinate (Suc). The oxyferryl intermediate subsequently hydroxylates the alkyl moiety of the substrate, which spontaneously decomposes after release from the enzyme to recover the unmodified base. Conformation and dynamics of AlkB characterized by1H-13C NMR at 283 K. (A) X-ray crystal structure of AlkB (PDB ID 2FD8). The Fe(II)/2OG core and NRL are colored gray and magenta, respectively; substrates and cosubstrates (red) Fe(II), (green) 2OG, and (blue) 5'-TmAT-3' (mA = 1-methyl A) are depicted as spheres and sticks; methionine residues are shown as orange sticks. (B) Methyl1H-13C spectra for13Cepsilon-Met AlkB successively titrated with (red) 2.0 * Zn(II), (green) 10.0 * 2OG cosubstrate, and (blue) 1.5 * 5'-CAmAAT-3' substrate. (C) Linear correlations of the M49 chemical shifts from panel A and from additional spectra of the enzyme saturated with the alternative substrates 1-methyladenosine triphosphate (mA, cyan) or 5'-TmAT-3' (TmAT, magenta). (D) The methyl1H-1H cross-correlated relaxation rate eta. An approximate value tauc= 21.9 +/- 0.5 ns yields a maximum value of eta = 79 +/- 2 s-1for the closed AlkB/Zn(II)/2OG/5'-CAmCAT-3' complex. This estimate suggests that M57 and M61 are highly immobilized in the closed complex. (E) (translucent)R? MQ= (RDQ+RZQ)/2 and (solid) DeltaRMQ= (RDQ-RZQ)/2 for13Cepsilon-Met resonances in AlkB, colored as in panel B.RZQandRDQrepresent the zero- and double-quantum relaxation rate constants, respectively. (F) Two-state chemical exchange model (solid lines) for (circles)R? MQor (squares) DeltaR? MQ. This research was originally published in ref (44). Copyright 2014 American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology. Fluorescence and NMR spectroscopic experiments were used to characterize the mechanism of ordered addition of 2OG and nucleotide substrates. NoneThe NMR measurements used the four methionine residues in AlkB as spectroscopic probes, because residues M49 and M57 in the nucleotide recognition lid (NRL) domain and M61 in the dioxygenase core domain are located in the active site in the AlkB/Fe(II)/2OG/5'-TmAT-3' (mA = 1-methyl A) complex structure (Figure2A). The fourth residue, M92, is located in a hinge between the dioxygenase and NRL domains. Other studies using backbone15N NMR experiments have been reported. NoneTitrations performed using Zn(II) as a diamagnetic and catalytically inactive substitute for Fe(II) are shown in Figure2B. The1H and13C resonances of the terminal methyl group in M49 and M57 exhibit random-coil chemical shifts in the AlkB/Zn(II) complex, suggesting that these side chains are disordered. Addition of 2OG leads to downfield shifts and substantial increases in line widths of both1H and13C resonances. Addition of the 5'-CAmCAT-3' substrate results in further downfield shifts and dramatic narrowing of the resonance lines, suggesting that the AlkB/Zn(II)/2OG/5'-CAmCAT-3' complex is highly ordered. The resonances for M61, which is the innermost methionine residue in the active site, display a complex pattern of chemical shift resonance positions, likely from influences of the ligands. The resonances of M92 are only slightly perturbed during the titrations. As shown in Figure2C, the1H and13C resonances of M49 observed in titrations with a variety of substrates and products are linearly correlated, with longer oligonucleotide substrates yielding more downfield shifts, consistent with increased rigidity. Notably, the M49 and M57 resonances observed in AlkB/Zn(II)/2OG and AlkB/Zn(II)/Suc complexes are intermediate between the AlkB/Zn(II) and AlkB/Zn(II)/2OG/5'-CAmCAT-3' complexes. The titrations suggest that AlkB/Zn(II) transiently populates a state in which the active site methionine residues (and by extension the NRL) are disordered (termed herein the open state) and a state in which these residues are ordered (termed the closed state). To confirm this hypothesis, dynamics of methionine1H313Cepsilongroups on picosecond-nanosecond time scales were characterized from the1H-1H dipole-dipole cross-correlated relaxation interference rate constant, eta ? S2taum. NoneValues of eta are small for M49, M57, and M61 of the AlkB/Zn(II) complex, confirming that these side chains are disordered in the open state, and increase first upon addition of 2OG and then upon addition of 5'-CAmAAT-3' to form the closed complex (Figure2D). The residues M57 and M61, which are more buried than M49 in the closed complex, have similar eta values to M92, which is ordered in all states. Exchange kinetics between open and closed states were quantified using a methyl TROSY13C Hahn-echo experiment to measure1H-13C zero- and double-quantum relaxation rate constants for methionine1H313Cepsilongroups (Figure2E). NoneThe M49 chemical shift and relaxation data were fit simultaneously to a two-site exchange model analogous to eq5in the limitkex? Deltaomega, and Deltaomega refers to differences in zero- or double-quantum frequencies in the two states (Figure2F). The rate constant for transition to the closed state was determined ask1= 12 700 +/- 200 s-1, assumed to be constant. The populations of the closed state were determined to be 0.16, 0.65, and ?1 in the Zn(II), Zn(II)/2OG, and Zn(II)/2OG/5'-CAmAAT-3' complexes, respectively. Thus, AlkB interconverts on the microsecond-millisecond time scale between an open state, in which the active site methionine side chains are disordered on the picosecond-nanosecond time scale, and a closed state in which the methionine side chains are ordered on the picosecond-nanosecond time scale. Titrations monitored by fluorescence spectroscopy reveal that primary substrates cannot effectively bind to the predominant disordered open state of the AlkB/Zn(II) complex. Binding of 2OG increases the population of the ordered state ?4-fold and accounts for a substantial fraction of the observed increase in affinity of the 5'-CAmAAT-3' substrate for the AlkB/Zn(II)/2OG complex compared with the AlkB/Zn(II) complex. Furthermore, the oxyferryl intermediate must remain sequestered from water until the hydroxylation reaction is complete to avoid generation of toxic oxygen species. Fluorescence and NMR data confirm that the opening rate of the enzyme-substrate complex and release of the unreacted methylated DNA substrate is slower than hydroxylation. NoneThe initial encounter enzyme-substrate complex, denoted ES1S2in eq1, may rearrange subsequently to a "closed" enzymatically competent state, (ES1S2)*. Closure may form important interactions between the enzyme and substrate but also may prevent adventitious side reactions by excluding water from the active site or restricting release of reactive intermediates (as briefly described for AlkB above). As a consequence, product release from the closed enzyme may become (partially) rate limiting for catalysis. The enzyme triosephosphate isomerase (EC 5.3.1.1, TIM) catalyzes reversible isomerization of dihydroxy-acetone phosphate tod-glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate. X-ray crystal structures show that the major difference between the homodimeric enzyme in apo and liganded states is an ?7 A movement of active site loop 6 (residues 167-177 inSaccharomyces cerevisiae) between open, in which the active site is accessible to substrate, and closed, in which the active site is occluded, conformations. None-NoneThe closed conformation of the enzyme holds the substrate in the proper orientation for reaction and prevents loss of the enediol reaction intermediate, which otherwise would decompose in solution yielding the toxic product methyl glyoxal. NoneInvestigations of loop 6 conformational changes in the W90Y, W157F double mutant ofS. cerevisiaeTIM by solution NMR spectroscopy are summarized in Figure3. NoneResidues with significant differences in backbone1HNand15N chemical shift changes between apo TIM and the complex with the substrate analog glycerol 3-phosphate (G3P) interact with or are located near G3P in the active site, with the largest perturbations associated with residues in loop 6 and the following helix F (Figure3A). Conformational dynamics on microsecond-millisecond time scales were characterized using a TROSY15N Hahn spin-echo measurement of chemical exchange contributions to transverse relaxation,Rex. NoneResults are shown as a function of amino acid sequence in Figure3B and are mapped onto the structure of TIM in Figure3C; large values ofRexare observed for residues in loop 6 and in helix G. Equation5indicates that whenkex? Deltaomega, a linear correlation is expected for a plot ofRexversus Deltaomega2for a set of nuclear spins affected by the same conformational exchange process, that is, the same global kinetic parameters but residue-specific values of Deltaomega. Figure3D shows a plot ofRexversus the square of the15N chemical shift perturbation observed upon binding of G3P. The linear dependence for residues in loop 6 confirms that these residues move with the same rate constant,kex? 3500 s-1at 288 K, and an activation barrier of ?45 kJ/mol, in agreement with solid-state2H and solution-state19F NMR spectroscopy of Trp168None,Noneand solution15N relaxation dispersion measurements. NoneLoop 6 dynamics in triosephosphate isomerase (TIM). (A)15N (DeltadeltaN) and1H (DeltadeltaH) chemical shift changes in TIM upon the binding of G3P. The values of (10DeltadeltaH2+ DeltadeltaN2)1/2are color coded onto the structure of the TIM monomer from white (0 ppm) to red (7.1 ppm). Active site residues Asn10, Lys12, His95, Ser96, Glu97, and Glu165 are shown in stick representation. (B)Rexfor G3P-bound TIM at 298 K and 18.8 T. (C) Cartoon representation of the apo structure of TIM; (red) residues withRex greater than 0, and (yellow) residues located in loop 6 withRex= 0. (D)Rexversus DeltadeltaN2at 298 K. A linear correlation is observed for loop 6 residues colored in black (correlation coefficient = 0.9). Rexfor (vermillion) residues 213, 220, and 221 is not correlated with loop 6 closing. (blue) Residues that are not part of loop 6 with DeltadeltaN2 greater than 0 butRex? 0. (E) Distance between the Calpha atoms of Gly171 and Y208 monitors loop 6 opening and closing in MD simulations starting from (black) closed (PDB 7TIM) and (vermillion) open (PDB 1YPI) conformations performed at 300 K in the absence of bound ligands. Horizontal lines show the distances in the crystal structures of closed (-) and open (---) states. (F) Calpha pseudodihedral angle, Theta, for Gly 173 for trajectories that started from the (black) closed and (vermillion) open states; Theta0is the value of Theta in the corresponding X-ray structure. Adapted with permission from ref (52). Copyright 2006 American Chemical Society. Stochastic boundary MD simulations with trajectory lengths of 10 ns at 300 K were initiated from both closed and open conformations of TIM, in the absence of any ligands, to confirm and extend the results from NMR spectroscopy. Figure3E shows the time-dependence of loop motion for residue Gly171 in loop 6; other residues in the loop show similar behavior. If simulations started from the closed conformation of loop 6, then the loop was observed to open during the trajectory. If simulations started from the open state, then the loop sampled closed and open conformations during the trajectory without fully closing. Pseudodihedral angles, Theta, defined between the Calpha atoms ofi- 1,i,i+ 1, andi+ 2 were used to quantify local rotational fluctuations of loop 6. Residuesi= 166, 174, 175, and 175 at the hinges of the loop exhibit the largest differences in Theta between the X-ray structures of free and bound TIM, while the MD simulations indicate that the most flexible region of the loop is centered around Gly173 (Figure3F). These results support the conclusion from NMR spectroscopy that loop 6 moves in a correlated fashion and confirm that motions of Gly173 contribute to the initial steps in the opening of the active site loop, required for product release. NoneThe MD simulations suggest that the dynamic process in helix G detected by NMR spectroscopy is distinct from the loop 6 motion and may reflect transitions between 310- and alpha-helical structures. The above examples have illustrated the application of NMR spectroscopy, often in conjunction with MD simulations, to characterize substrate binding and conformational rearrangements of enzymes at various steps along the reaction scheme shown in eq1. NMR relaxation methods applied to these examples demonstrate that conformational dynamics on a range of time scales can be associated with autoinhibition and allosteric regulation, substrate recognition, remodeling of enzyme-substrate encounter complexes, and product release. The conformational changes discussed herein for RNase H, AlkB, and TIM do not directly affect the chemical step,kcat. For example, the dramatic difference in rate when the active site loop of TIM is closed reflects the equilibrated enzyme-substrate complex structure, rather than a dynamical effect of the closing loop. In transition state theory,kcat= (kT/h)Cexp[-Ea/(kT)], in whichCis a (temperature dependent) prefactor andEais the activation energy. Dynamical effects on transition-state barrier recrossing contributions toC(in some reactions quantum mechanical tunneling also contributes toC) have recently been assessed by comparing reactivity in natural abundance and isotopically enriched dihydrofolate reductase. NoneModern NMR spectroscopy makes extensive use of isotopically enriched proteins and should prove a powerful approach for such investigations in the future.