Cadherin 23 (CDH23) is encoded by a large Cdh23gene containing 69 exons spanning at least 350 kb in the mouse. It is a 365 kDa transmembrane protein composed of 27 extracellular cadherin (EC) repeats, a single-pass transmembrane region, and a cytoplasmic region and is an important component of the hair cell tip-link in the organ of Corti. 1-3Mutations in theCDH23gene in humans have been linked to age-related hearing loss (AHL),4Usher syndrome type 1 subtype D (USH1D),5,6and a form of nonsyndromic autosomal recessive deafness designated as DFNB12. 6Different mutations in theCDH23gene can cause either syndromic or nonsyndromic forms of deafness: Only missense mutations ofCDH23have been observed in families with nonsyndromic deafness, whereas nonsense, frameshift, splice-site, and missense mutations have been identified in families with Usher syndrome (syndromic). 7Age-related hearing loss (AHL) is a characteristic of the widely used C57BL/6J mouse strain. 8AHL starts with a moderate hearing impairment in 1-year-old C57BL/6J mice, and progresses to complete hearing loss with age. Linkage studies associated AHL with a locus namedahl. 9A single-nucleotide polymorphism in exon 7 ofCdh23was significantly associated with AHL and the deafness modifiermdfw(modifier of deaf waddler). The hypomorphicCdh23None(synonymous withCdh23None) allele causes in-frame skipping of exon 7. 4Histological analysis correlated AHL with a gradual loss of hair cells, spiral ganglion cells and degeneration of fibrocytes in the spiral ligament. 10,11Most other mouse models of point mutation in theCdh23gene are characterized by congenital deafness with circling behavior. 1,2,12,13Each of these mutations leads to the loss of functional domains. In four waltzer alleles (vNone, vNonevAlb, vngt), loss of functional protein has been reported to disrupt the highly organized stereocilia bundle of hair cells in the cochlea and the vestibule during late embryonic/early postnatal development. 1,13,14In all previously characterizedCdh23mouse models, the mice are either deaf at birth,2exhibit severe very early onset hearing loss15or very late-onset hearing loss with slow progression. 9The deaf (v-df) mutant was reported by Deol MS, thatv-dfmice may be deaf from the beginning or may be able to hear for a few days before weaning but otherwise behave normally16. Although the final pathological outcome is consistently observed as inner ear hair cell loss2, none of these models provide an easily manageable time interval for evaluating pathophysiological changes and/or for screening and testing drug therapies. Here, we introduce a new mouse model of DFNB12 which is characterized by progressive hearing loss starting at P27 and progressing to deafness by p100. This is an ideal time window for testing otoprotective drugs. Nevertheless, we have found that apoptosis plays a major role in hair cell loss in this mouse model. Most importantly, we report here that a pan-caspase inhibitor not only preserved inner ear hair cells but also prevented hearing loss by up to 35 dB in the mutant mice. Mice were originally housed in The Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, Maine) research facilities and all procedures were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (protocols 5U01NS041215 R01DC007392). Mice were then relocated to Case Western Reserve University (CWRU, Cleveland, Ohio). Further studies were conducted in accordance with the principles set forth in the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals, Institute of Laboratory Animal Resources, and were approved by the Case Western Reserve University of the Health Sciences Institutional Animal Use and Care Committee (R01DC009246). ENU-induced (N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea, C3H6N3O2) mutagenesis was performed as part of a large-scale screening program for new mutants at the Jackson Laboratory using predominantly the C57BL/6J (B6) mouse strain (The Jackson Laboratory Neuromutagenesis Facility website:http://nmf.jax.org). A detailed protocol is described athttp://nmf.jax.org/protocols/genetics_scheme.html. As hearing impairment was the only measurable phenotype oferlmutant mice, we had to trace phenotype by testing hearing with ABR thresholds for maintaining colonies and performing all experiments. Genetic intercross generated 13 affected ((B6XC3H/HeJ)F1-erl/+)X((B6XC3H/HeJ)F1-erl/+) F2 progeny with elevated ABR thresholds as shown inSupplementary Table 1. A DNA pooling method for gene mapping was used as previously described. 17,18Genomic DNA sequencing to identify the alteration in theerlmutant mouse was performed as follows: Genomic DNA was prepared from tail tips of mice. Briefly, 2-mm mouse tail tips were digested with 0.3 ml of 50 mM NaOH in a 0.5 ml Eppendorf tube at 95 degrees C for 10 min. 26 mul of 1M Tris-HCl was then added to each tube. The mixtures were centrifuged at 12,000*g for 5 min and the DNA concentration in supernatants was measured using a BioPhotometer (Eppendorf AG, Hamburg, Germany). Forty-eight pairs of PCR primers spanning exons of the Cdh23 gene were designed using the Primer3 freeware (http://frodo.wi.mit.edu/primer3/) according to the exon sequence of theCdh23gene in the Ensemble Mouse Genome Server (www.ensembl.org), and synthesized by Integrated DNA Technologies, Inc. (San Diego, CA, USA). PCR for comparative DNA analysis betweenCdh23NoneandCdh23Nonemice was performed according to the Tmof the primers and the expected product sizes. PCR products were purified with the QIAquick PCR Purification kit (Qiagen, Inc. Valencia, CA, USA). DNA sequencing was performed using the same primers as for DNA amplification and then run on an ABI Applied Biosystems 3730 DNA Analyzer (Life Technologies Corp., Carlsbad, CA, USA). To confirm the mutation and to identify potential aberrant exon splicing,Cdh23NoneandCdh23Nonemice at 2 weeks of age were used for RNA extraction and RT-PCR. After mice were sacrificed under anesthesia (avertin 5 mg/10 g), the inner ears were quickly removed. Total RNA (DNA-free) was prepared using the pure-LinkTM Micro-to-Midi Total RNA Purification System (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). cDNA synthesis was carried out using the SuperScriptTMFirst-Strand Synthesis System (Catalog No. 11904-018). PCR primers (CdhmF and CdhmR intable 2) were designed in exon 2 and exon 4 yielding a 228-bp PCR product containing exon 3 and its flanking regions from exons 2 and 4. ABR was measured at various intervals forCdh23NoneandCdh23Nonemice (at ages over P14). A computer-aided evoked potential system (Intelligent Hearing Systems, Miami, FL, USA) was used to test mice for ABR thresholds as previously described. 8Briefly, mice were anesthetized and body temperature maintained at 37-38 degrees C by placing them on a heating pad in a sound-attenuating chamber. Subdermal needle electrodes were inserted at the vertex of (active) and ventrolaterally to (reference) the right ear and to the left ear (ground). Clicks, and 8-, 16- and 32-kHz tone-bursts were respectively channeled through plastic tubes into the animal's ear canals. The amplified brainstem responses were averaged by a computer and displayed on a computer screen. Auditory thresholds were obtained for each stimulus by reducing the sound pressure level (SPL) at 10-dB steps and finally at 5-dB steps up and down to identify the lowest level at which an ABR pattern could be recognized. ABR threshold values above 55 (for click stimulus), 40 (for 8 kHz), 35 (for 16 kHz), or 60 (for 32 kHz) dB SPL were considered to be hearing-impaired. 8To test the function of outer hair cells of different mice at different time points, we used the IHS Smart EP 3.30 USBez Software (Intelligent Hearing Systems, Miami, FL, USA) for DPOAE measurement, which was conducted for pure tones from 2 to 36 KHz. 19An Etymotic 10B+ (Etymotic Research, Inc., Elk Grove Village, IL, USA) probe was inserted into the external ear canal and used with two different types of transducers depending on the range of the stimulation frequency. For frequencies ranging from 2 to 16 kHz, an Etymotic ER2 stimulator was used and for frequencies ranging from 16 to 30 kHz, an IHS high frequency transducer was used. Stimulus response signals were sampled at a rate of 128 kHz using a 16-bit D/A converter; L1 and L2 amplitudes were set to the same level. Frequencies were acquired with an F2-F1 ratio of 1.22. The stimuli were presented starting from the lowest frequencies tested and increasing to the highest frequencies tested. Five stimulation levels ranging from 65 to 25 dB SPL in 10-dB steps were used. Histological analyses of inner ears were performed following the methods described previously. 20Briefly, anesthetized mice were perfused through the left ventricle of the heart with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) followed by Bouin's (for H E staining) or 4% paraformaldehyde (for all others) fixative. For microscopic analysis of cross-sections, inner ears fromCdh23NoneandCdh23Nonemice were dissected, perfused with fixative, immersed in same for 48 h, decalcified with Cal-EX solution for 6 h, and embedded in paraffin. Sections (5 mum) were cut, mounted on glass slides and counterstained in hematoxylin/eosin (H E). Cytocochleograms were obtained by a modified method as described previously. 20Briefly, the organ of Corti was carefully microdissected out and mounted in glycerin on glass slides. The surface preparations were stained for F-actin with Alexa Fluor 568 conjugated to phalloidin to show hair bundles and examined with a fluorescence microscope (Leica DM4000 B, Leica Microsystems, Wetzlar, Germany). Hair cells were counted as present if V-shapes of hair bundles were intact. Inner and outer hair cell counts were made by subdividing the cochlea into 10 regions at 10% distance intervals, beginning at the apex and continuing toward the base. Individual cochleograms were constructed to show the percentage of hair cells missing as a function of distance from the apex. Cdh23NoneandCdh23Nonemice were sacrificed under avertin anesthesia conditions at 2 weeks or 2 months of age. The inner ears and left temporal brain lobes (50 mg) were quickly isolated for total RNA and cDNA preparation as described in the previous section. One mug of total RNA from each sample was used as template for cDNA synthesis. The 20 mul reaction mixture contained 50 mM KCl, 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 9.0 (at 25 degrees C), 0.01% Triton X-100, 2 mM MgCl2, 250 nM of each primer (forward and reverse), 200 muM dNTPs, 1 mul of cDNA and 0.5 U ofTaqDNA polymerase (New England BioLabs, Inc., Ipswich, MA, USA). PCR primers are listed inTable 2. PCR was performed in a Bio-Rad PTC-200 Peltier Thermal Cycler (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Inc. Hercules, CA, USA). Amplification conditions were 94 degrees C for 2 min; followed by 28 cycles of 94 degrees C for 30 s, 60 degrees C for 40 s, and 72 degrees C for 50 s; followed by 5 min at 72 degrees C. Ten mul of the PCR products were subject to agarose gel electrophoresis and the gray intensity of each band was digitized using ImageJ software (rsb.info.nih.gov/nih-image/NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA) and corrected by the GAPDH mRNA accumulation level of the same sample. Caspase-3/7 activity was detected in inner ears of 9Cdh23Noneand 7Cdh23Nonemice by the Apo-ONE(r) Homogeneous Caspase-3/7 Assay (Promega Corp., Madison, WI, USA) according to the manufacturer's instructions. In brief, the inner ears were isolated and immersed in 300 mul of 0.1 M phosphate buffer saline (PBS) and homogenized on ice with a Tissue Mincer (Fisher Scientific, Pittsburgh, PA, USA). After centrifugation at 12000*g for 15 min at 4 degrees C, the supernatant was retained and the protein concentration determined by the Lowry method. For the caspase assay, the non-fluorescent caspase substrate (Z-DEVD-R110, diluted 100-fold in the provided buffer) was mixed with an equal volume (20 mul) of solution containing the same amount of total inner ear protein (20 mug) for each sample. The protein/substrate mixture was incubated at room temperature for 4 h and diluted 300-fold afterward. The fluorescent product was detected using a spectrofluorometer configured to an excitation wavelength of 499 nm and an emission wavelength of 521 nm. The relative fluorescence unit as a measure of caspase activity was calculated as the fluorescence counts divided by the total amount of protein. A time course immunocytochemistry study of caspase expression was carried out forCdh23NoneandCdh23None. The following antibodies from Cell Signaling Technology, Inc. (Danvers, MA, USA) were used. Cleaved caspase-3 (Asp175) antibody detects endogenous levels of the large fragment (17/19 kDa) of activated caspase-3 resulting from cleavage adjacent to Asp175 (This antibody does not recognize full-length caspase-3 or other cleaved caspases. ); caspase-8 antibody (mouse-specific) detects endogenous levels of the large 18 kDa subunit of active caspase-8; cleaved caspase-9 (Asp353) antibody (mouse-specific) detects endogenous levels of the 37 kDa subunit of mouse caspase-9 only after cleavage at aspartic acid 353. It does not cross-react with full-length caspase-9 or with other caspases at endogenous levels. Mice were subjected to ABR testing (age greater than = 14 days) under anesthetizing conditions and then sacrificed. The inner ears were removed and cryosections were made and fixed in 4% PFA (diluted in 1* PBS) for 2 h. The sections were washed in PBS at room temperature twice for 5 min and permeabilized in 0.5% Triton X-100 for 30 minutes. After being washed twice in 1* PBS for 5 min and blocked in 5% BSA for 1 h, the samples were immersed in anti-active caspase-3 or caspase-8 or caspase-9 (1:200 dilution) and incubated at 4 degrees C overnight. After being washed twice in 1* PBS for 5 min, the samples were immersed in anti-rabbit secondary antibody Alexa 488 (1:500 dilution) for 1 h. The samples were also stained with propidium iodide (10 mg/ml in PBS) for 30 min at room temperature. The sample mounts were observed under immunofluorescent microscopy. Cdh23Nonewas used as a model for testing anti-apoptotic drug therapy. SixtyCdh23Nonemice at the age of 7 days (a starting point based on the goal of preventing caspase increases, detected as early as P14 in untreatedCdh23Nonemice) were divided into 3 groups: a test group, a DMSO group and an untreated group. The following treatment regime was selected as the best treatment from three sets of preliminary regimes (data not shown). In the test group, 22 mice were injected intraperitoneally (IP) under sterile conditions with Z-VAD-FMK (1mug/mul) (Z-Val-Ala-Asp(OMe)-Fluoromethylketone, Alexis Biochemicals, Farmingdale, NY) in PBS-diluted DMSO (1:1) at the dosage21of 1.5 mug/g mouse weight: firstly, starting at P7, 8 injections, once every other day; secondly, 4 injections, once every 3 days; then, one injection every 4 days until the time of euthanization for experimental procedures. Eighteen mice in the DMSO group received 1.5 mul of PBS-diluted DMSO (1:1) per gram of mouse weight at the same time points as the test group. ABR and DPOAE were tested at 4 weeks, 6 weeks, 8 weeks and 12 weeks for the mice in each group and 4-5 mice from each group were sacrificed at each time point for histological investigation. The ANOVA was used for all data analysis except that hair cell loss data were analyzed by the Chi-Square Test. A value ofP less than 0.05 was considered significant. A new hearing-impaired mouse mutant was discovered at the Jackson Laboratory on the C57BL/6J (B6) background initially based on its lack of a Preyer reflex when presented with a calibrated 20 kHz 90 dB SPL (decibel sound pressure level) tone burst from a click box at two months of age. This mutant was originally generated from theNeuroscienceMutagenesis Facility (http://nmf.jax.org/, was designated #NMF308), but here is named erlong (symbol:erl), meaning hearing impaired in Chinese language. Subsequently, hearing loss (starting at P27,Table 1) was shown to progress to deafness (at P90) by auditory brainstem response (ABR) threshold testing in the homozygous colony (data not shown). No balance defect was observed throughout the lifespan of these mice. Initially, the mutant was mated with an unrelated B6 mouse to determine the heritability pattern of the mutation. ABR testing revealed no hearing loss in (erlX B6) F1 progeny up to 3 months of age, thus indicating thaterlis a recessive hearing loss mutation. B6-erl/erlmice were outcrossed with C3H/HeJ mice to generate the (B6XC3H/HeJ)F1-erl/+mice. These F1 mice were intercrossed (F1xF1) and yielded a Mendelian proportion of a single gene recessive inheritance pattern, generating roughly 1/4 (13/51)erl/erlF2 progeny with ABR thresholds above 80 dB SPL and 3/4 (38/51) ?/+ (1/4 +/+ and 1/2erl/+)F2 progeny with ABR thresholds below 50 dB SPL at five months of age (seeSupplementary Table 1). Our previous publications showed that, for age-related hearing loss, many strains have a Chromosome 10 (Cdh23) effect4,8,20,22-25that causes hearing loss; therefore, we first tested this possibility by analyzing the genotype of a marker (D10Mit194,Chr location: 46MB) close to theCdh23gene (Chr location: 59MB). A PCR assay on pooled genomic DNA from the 13 hearing-impaired F2 progeny showed a distinctive single PCR band for the B6 allele ofD10Mit194, suggesting thaterlmight be another AHL-related allele of theCdh23gene on Chr 10 on which we previously worked4,8,9,22,24,25or another locus in the same region. Then individual DNA samples of the 51 F2 progeny were genotyped with respect toD10Mit194, D10Mit166(Chr location: 6MB) andD10Mit42(Chr location: 82MB). The results showed that the candidate interval was betweenD10Mit194andD10Mit42at 29 cM on chromosome 10; whereas, theCdh23gene is located at 30.3 cM as shown in theSupplementary Table 1. These results prompted us to do a genetic complementation test with mice carrying the most severeCdh23allele, waltzer 2 Jackson (abbreviatedv-2J; complete designation is C57BL/6J-Cdh23None-None/J), the deaf and circling allele1,2,25. Complementation tests revealed allelism of theerllocus and thev-2Jlocus indicating thaterlis a new allele of theCdh23gene. As shown inTable 1, one litter of 8 pups was born (ID 1-8). The 4erl/v-2Jcompound-heterozygous mice (ID 1-4) showed a hearing-loss level intermediate (without circling behavior) between that ofv-2J/v-2J(ID 9) anderl/erl(ID 10), which suggests a codominant effect. Genotypes of thev-2Janderlmice shown inTable 1were individually confirmed afterward by sequencing. These results were corroborated by an analysis of another litter of 9 pups from a B6-erl/erlx B6-v-2J/v-2Jmating that gave a deaf phenotype without any balance defect for all 9 mice at P60. Genomic DNA screening to identify the alteration in theCdh23gene was performed by PCR and sequencing of all exons of theCdh23gene with detailed comparisons between mutants and controls using SequencherR 4.0 (genecodes.com; Gene Codes Corporation, Ann Arbor, MI, USA). A point mutation (208T greater than C) in the middle region of exon 3 (Genbank accession number: NM_023370) was identified by sequencing the PCR products of primer pairex3-F1andex3-R1(for three mutant and two control genomics DNA samples, seeTable 2for primer sequences) and confirmed by sequencing the cDNA of this gene (Figure 1a). No other mutations were found in any other exons of this entire gene. The RT-PCR products with primers flanking exon 3 and adjacent exons gave a clear single band (of the predicted size and identical to a normal control, data not shown) upon agarose gel electrophoresis suggesting that no aberrant splicing is caused by this mutation. Theerlmutation did not quantitatively alter the expression level of Cdh23 mRNA (supplementary Figure 1a). The mutation results in an amino acid (aa) substitution of serine to proline (70S-P) in the first ectodomain (EC1, aa 38-132). The distinctive cyclic structure of the proline side chain locks its phi backbone dihedral angle at approximately-75 degrees , giving proline an exceptional conformational rigidity compared to other amino acids. Proline acts as a structural disruptor in the middle of regular secondary structure element - alpha helix (aa 73-76) and to changes in the surrounding extended strands (specifically, an extended strand formed by aa 65-68 in the wild type mice shifts to that formed by aa 65-67 in the mutant, and another one formed by aa 77-80 in the wild type mice to that formed by aa 76-80 in the mutant mice) affecting the secondary structure of the protein when analyzed by the GOR IV secondary structure prediction method26. The substituted amino acid is not within but nearby a conserved calcium-binding site (aa 59-61, sequence DMD, highlighted inFigure 1c). Loss of the alpha helix and changes in the extended strands will probably affect protein function, such as formation of tip-links in the stereocilia or binding efficiency to calcium ions. Based on the mutation, a genotyping method was established to distinguish mice carrying theCdh23Noneallele from mice carrying theCdh23None(C57BL/6J) allele by size differences on an agarose gel of PCR products digested withBstNI (Figure 1b). This confirms in another way that theerlmutation was accurately identified. By sequencing, we confirmed that all of theerlmice carry theahlallele, thus this allele causes in-frame skipping of exon 7 and may contribute to conformational changes of CDH23. 4Distortion product otoacoustic emissions (DPOAEs) were measured to determine the mutant effect on OHC function over time in Cdh23Nonemice as compared toCdh23Nonecontrols (Fig. 2a). Three-week-old Cdh23Nonemice had normal DPOAE amplitudes that were indistinguishable from those ofCdh23Nonemice which have normal hearing as determined by ABR thresholds at 3 weeks (wks). At 7 wks of age, Cdh23Nonemice had DPOAE amplitudes 10-20 dB lower than those ofCdh23Noneat frequencies from 10 to 18 kHz. By 22 wks of age, Cdh23Nonemice had no detectable DPOAE at any frequency indicating complete deafness. ABR recordings yielded normal wave patterns (data not shown) but elevated thresholds at every frequency tested (click, 8, 16, 32 kHz from 30-99 dB,Figure 2bandTable 1) with high frequencies affected first, as early as P40, progressing to deafness at P90 and thereafter remaining deaf to at least 9 months of age. The Cdh23Nonemice exhibit hearing loss much earlier (P40) than do mice expressing otherCdh23alleles such asCdh23Nonemice (12-months onset,Figure 2bandTable 1). The vestibular system in these mutant mice appears to be unaffected by theerlmutation as Cdh23Nonemice exhibited normal swimming ability (3 Cdh23Nonemiceat 4 months of age had similar normal swimming as B6 mice) and gait pattern as observed for all time points examined up to 9 months. To investigate cochlear pathology inCdh23NoneversusCdh23Nonecontrol mice, cochleae were stained for F-actin with Alexa Fluor 568 conjugated to phalloidin to examine all turns and reveal the presence and morphology of OHCs (Figure 2c). The OHCs ofCdh23Nonemice at P100 (Figure 2c, upper panel) showed normal V-shaped arrangement of stereocilia. No OHC loss was observed in any of the cochlear turns ofCdh23Nonemice, as correlates with normal ABR thresholds up to 9 months (Figure 2b). In contrast, large segments of OHC loss were evident in the middle cochlear turns of Cdh23Nonemice at P100 (Figure 2c, lower panel). This OHC loss at P100 follows ABR threshold shifts observed at P27-P90 (Figure 2b). To quantify OHC loss and to determine the developmental time course of OHC loss, we generated cytocochleograms from 25Cdh23Nonemice ranging from one to nine months of age. For each cytocochleogram, we calculated the percentage of missing OHC and IHC by subdividing the cochlea into 10 regions at 10% distance intervals from the apex of the cochlea. Scatter plots were constructed showing the mean percentage of OHC loss as a function of age for Cdh23Nonemice (Figure 2d). Cdh23Nonemice showed no evidence of OHC loss from P0 to P28. However, OHC loss was observable at 3 months, became progressively worse over time, and moved from the cochlear base to the apex inCdh23Nonemice. OHC loss in the 75-100% region increased to a nearly complete loss after 3 months of age, corresponding to a high frequency hearing loss (16 and 32 kHz, top two lines inFig. 2b) earlier than that of low frequency hearing loss (8kHz, bottom line,Fig. 2b) as measured by ABR. Because IHC loss was not significant until after 5 months of age, IHCs were excluded from this analysis. To determine whether OHC loss might be the result of OHC apoptosis, we examined expression of apoptosis-related genes inCdh23Nonemice. Gene transcription levels of apoptosis-related genes were measured in the inner ears ofCdh23Noneand controlCdh23Nonemice at 2 wks and 2 months of age (Figure 3). The extrinsic caspase-8 and intrinsic caspase-9 initiators, and activator caspase-3 were significantly up-regulated (P less than 0.05 for each) inCdh23Nonesamples relative to the levels measured in controlCdh23Nonesamples (Figure 3a and 3b) though the intensity for caspase-8 was higher and earlier than that of caspase-9, suggesting that the extrinsic pathway was initiated earlier than the intrinsic. At the two-month time point, the expression level of caspase-9 was also up-regulated (P less than 0.05) inCdh23Nonesamples. However, there was no significant difference in mRNA accumulation levels of caspase-3, caspase-8 and caspase-9 genes in brain tissue betweenCdh23NoneandCdh23Nonemice at the ages of 2 weeks or 2 months (P greater than 0.05, data not shown), indicating that the apoptotic gene expression measured in ear tissue was not a generalized phenomenon. To confirm whether increased mRNA levels were correlated with changes at the protein level, the Apo-ONE(r) homogeneous caspase-3/7 assay (Promega) was used to measure caspase-3 and -7 activities in inner ears oferlmutants and control mice. The relative fluorescence unit is a measure of caspase activity in the homogenized inner ear tissue from the mice in each group, upon addition of a caspase substrate to the homogenate. At P14 (2 weeks) and P60 (2 months), the relative caspase-3/7 activity was significantly higher inCdh23Nonemice than inCdh23Nonemice (Figure 3c and 3d). To investigate inner ear apoptosisin situin theCdh23Nonemouse model and determine whether the observed OHC loss can be explained by apoptosis of the OHCs, we stained tissue sections with fluorescein-labeled antibodies to detect cells that express caspases. The antibodies used specifically detect only the active forms of caspases-3, -8 and -9. Cdh23Nonemice were used as controls. We investigated three time points leading up to the time of complete hearing loss at 3 months, and beginning at the P14 time point (Figure 4). At P14, caspases-8 and -9 were expressed in the middle turns of cochleae (mainly in the outer hair cells (OHC) and spiral ganglion cells (SG) for caspase-8 and caspase-9) of theCdh23Nonemice (Figure 4d, 4e) compared to the same areas of theCdh23Nonemice (Figure 4a, 4b). Primary antibody-omitted sham sections of the cochleae of both mouse groups demonstrated that this staining was specific and not an artifact of non-specific secondary antibody staining (Figure 4c, 4f). Notably, caspase-8 stained OHC stronger than SG (Figure 4d), whereas caspase-9 stained OHC weaker than SG (Figure 4e). A time course observation of caspase-3 staining in the middle turns of cochleae ofCdh23Nonemice is shown inFigure 5. Anti-caspase-3 (the activated, downstream, effector caspase) staining was not visible in any areas of the cochleae at P14 (Figure 5a); however, it was evident in the cytoplasm of OHCs ofCdh23Nonemice by P23 (Figure 5b) and became stronger by P57 (Figure 5c). Active caspase-3 was also positive in the spiral ligament (SL) at both time points at P57. An enlarged image of OHCs fromFigure 5cshowed the overlapping staining (Figure 5f) of PI-stained nuclei (Figure 5e) and anti-caspase-3-stained cytoplasm (Figure 5d). Anti-caspase-3 signals were not detected in any cochlear turns fromCdh23Nonemice. The relative mRNA levels ofTNF-alpha,caspase-12, m-calpainandmu-calpainwere significantly up-regulated in theCdh23Nonemice at both time points of 2 weeks (Supplementary Figure 1a, c) and 2 months (Supplementary Figure 1b, d), indicating multiple apoptosis pathways are involved in the hearing loss of these mutant mice. ButTNF-alpha(Supplementary Fig. 1a) was up-regulated at the younger age (2 weeks) more significantly than other genes (c), suggesting the extrinsic pathway may play an important role for initiation of apoptosis. The fact that caspase-8 was up-regulated at the younger age (2 weeks) (Figure 3a) more significantly (P less than 0.01) than other genes in theCdh23Nonemice also supports this point becauseTNF-alphaand caspase-8 are both important indicators of the extrinsic apoptotic pathway. Calpains, caspase-12 (Supplementary Figure 1b, d, P less than 0.05) and caspase-9 (Figure 3b, P less than 0.05) were also up-regulated slightly, but significantly, as indicators of intrinsic apoptosis. Cdh23Nonewas used as a model for testing anti-apoptotic drug therapy. SixtyCdh23Nonemice were divided into a test group, a diluent (DMSO) control group and an untreated control group. Each mouse in the test group received Z-VAD-FMK (in dimethyl sulfoxide, DMSO, 1:1 diluted with PBS) intraperitoneally (ip) at a dosage of 1.5 mug/g body weight at different time points: firstly, eight injections, on a schedule of one injection every other day, beginning at age P7; then 4 injections, on a schedule of one injection every 3 days; and lastly, one injection every 4 days until the time of euthanization for analysis at various time points. Each mouse in the DMSO group received an equivalent volume of DMSO following an identical injection schedule to its cohort test group. ABR and DPOAE were tested at 4 wks, 6 wks, 8 wks and 12 wks of age. ABR thresholds were significantly lower in the DMSO+Z-VAD-FMK-treated mice than in the DMSO-treated or the untreatedCdh23Nonemice at stimulus frequencies of click, 8 kHz, 16 kHz and 32 kHz and at all time points (P less than 0.05 at 4 wks;P less than 0.01, for the time points of 6 wks, 8 wks and 12 wks) (Figure 6). There were also significant differences in ABR thresholds between the untreated and DMSO-treated mice at 12 wks for the stimulus frequency of 16 kHz (P less than 0.05) (Figure 6c). The mean amplitude of DPOAE at 16 kHz was significantly higher in the DMSO+Z-VAD-FMK-treated mice than that of the untreated or DMSO-treated group at the age of 8 wks (P less than 0.05, respectively,Figure 7). Loss of outer hair cells (OHC) was evident in the middle turns of cochleae of the untreated or DMSO-treated mouse groups at 2 months of age; whereas, no OHC loss was seen in the corresponding areas of the Z-VAD-FMK+DMSO-treated mice (Figure 8). OHC and inner hair cell (IHC) loss was counted and averaged from apical to basal turn of cochlear surface preparations in the three mouse groups (n=4 mice per group) at 2 months of age (Figure 9). The mean percentage of OHC loss was significantly less in Z-VAD-FMK+DMSO-treatedCdh23Nonemice than in the untreated or DMSO-treated mice at the apex, middle or basal cochlear regions. There was also significantly less OHC loss in the DMSO-treated mice than in the untreated mice at the basal turn (P less than 0.05). IHC loss was not substantially altered by the treatment. Additionally, we have not observed any adverse effects of Z-VAD-FMK treatment (such as tumor development in the intestine, colon, liver or lungs or i.p injection site) on the treated mice during the experimental period up to 3-4 months of ages (data not shown). As represented inSupplementary Figure 2, serial sections demonstrated that Z-VAD-FMK treatment could protect OHCs from loss inCdh23v-None-Nonemice, but failed to improve the hearing of the mice at any level. The survival of inner ear hair cells may still be important to release neurotrophic factors for keeping spiral ganglion neurons viable and for responding to electrical stimuli in cochlear-implanted USH1D patients, despite the inability of rescued hair cells to function in hearing. Thus anti-apoptosis treatment in USH1D patients might be useful in the future, but will require further studies. TheCdh23Nonemice introduced in this study are of the C57BL/6J background and proved to be carrying a new allele ofCdh23. Cdh23Noneis characterized by progressive hearing loss starting about 1 month after birth and becoming deaf at 3 months of age. Hair cell loss began near the base of the cochlea and spread toward the apical turn, and lesions of the spiral ganglion were also involved at a later stage (P149, data not shown). TheCdh23Nonemouse, therefore, provides a promising model for investigating the pathogenesis of DNFB12. It is also an ideal mouse model for otoprotection drug therapy and discovery. Given that the hearing loss inCdh23Nonemice happens before hair cell loss (P60 seeFig. 2d) but after caspase signals increase (P14), we hypothesized that apoptosis might be the mechanism for causing a physiological deficit to occur before hair cell loss. There are mainly two pathways of cellular apoptosis as shown inFigure 10. 27,28In response to extra-cellular stimuli, the initiator of the extrinsic pathway (caspase-8) undergoes self-processing, releasing active enzyme molecules into the cytosol and activating caspase-3, caspase-6, and caspase-7. These activated caspases proteolytically cleave and activate other caspases, as well as relevant targets in cells. Alternatively, the intrinsic pathway involves release from the mitochondrion of pro-apoptotic proteins that activate caspase enzymes, mainly caspase-9, which ultimately trigger apoptosis by activating caspase-3, caspase-6, and caspase-7. Therefore, we attempted to determine the role of apoptosis in the pathogenesis of theCdh23Nonemouse model by examining expression of apoptosis-related proteins in the inner ears of these mice. Our results showed significantly up-regulated transcriptional levels of caspase-3, caspase-8 and caspase-9 in the inner ears ofCdh23Nonemice at 2 weeks and/or 2 months of age, indicating both extrinsic and intrinsic pathway activation. Though the extrinsic pathway was activated slightly earlier and more strongly than the intrinsic pathway, this presumably was the result of increased TNFalpha signalling triggered by debris from broken stereocilia composed of mis-folded CDH23erl/erlprotein, due to the phi backbone dihedral angle (-75 degrees ) caused by the proline from the aa substitution (70S-P). A detailed mechanistic explanation of why mutated CDH23 increases TNF-alpha signalling is yet to be determined. Another possibility is that the 70S-P introduced conformational changes in the first ectodomain, ultimately leading to intracellular domain and catenin complex signal changes that modulate apoptosis. 29,30Immunostaining showed that caspase-8 was activated in the organ of Corti at P14, that caspase-3 was activated by P23 and that the staining for both became more intense at P57. Additionally, there were signs of apoptosis in the spiral ganglion and the stria vascularis. In contrast to a previous report in rat of a strong active caspase-3 signal in the lateral wall of the cochlear basal turn with drug-induced damage,21our mouse experiments showed that caspase immunoreactivities were first present and strong in the basal turn and middle turns of the organ of Corti. Based on these results, we conclude that apoptosis plays a major role inCdh23Nonemice in the death of hair cells, spiral ganglion cells and cells of the spiral ligament and stria vascularis in the inner ear, and that the cell death mechanism of drug-induced damage in rat may differ from the mechanism in a genetic mutant such as theCdh23Nonemouse. The up-regulated apoptosis is probably localized to the inner ear inCdh23Nonemice, as there was no significant difference in mRNA accumulation levels for caspase-3, caspase-8 or caspase-9 genes in brain tissue betweenCdh23NoneandCdh23Nonemice. We acknowledge that other mechanisms may apply for possible causes of hearing loss in other mutations. Cadherins are glycoproteins involved in Ca2+-mediated cell-cell adhesion, migration and compaction. 2CDH23 is an important component of the Ush1 interactome and of the tip-links in the mechanotransduction (MET) system of the organ of Corti. 15,31-33It is involved in regulating the activity of mechanically gated ion channels in hair cells. 3,34,35It is reported that, of the 21 missense mutations inCDH23that have been observed in patients with nonsyndromic hearing loss, 10 occurred within the DXNDN, LDRE and DXD calcium-binding motifs. These motifs are highly conserved in sequence and spacing and are required for cadherin dimerization and Ca2+-binding, suggesting that deficiency of the calcium-dependent cell adhesion has a major impact on cochlear cell integrity36. Because calcium provides rigidity to the elongated structure of cadherin molecules thus enabling homophilic lateral interaction, mutations in the calcium-binding motifs of CDH23 are likely to impair homophilic interactions of CDH23 molecules and possibly also interactions with other proteins. 37Though the change in structure in CDH23 protein in theCdh23Nonemice is not located precisely at the Ca2+-binding site, it is nearby. Thus, we speculate that it may influence the efficiency of CDH23 interactions with proteins, Ca2+and ultimately may affect calcium-dependent cell adhesion, leading to apoptosis in theCdh23Nonemutant mice by multiple pathways (Figure 10). (1) The intricate relationship between CDH23 and other proteins of the USH complex could be disrupted by theerlmutation, causing faulty OHC hair bundle formation and extrinsic apoptosis, as the mRNA level of TNF-alpha was significantly higher in the ears of theCdh23Nonemice (Fig s1a,b). This pathway may be the earliest and strongest-affected pathway in our mouse model among all possible involved pathways. (2) We did find that calpains and caspase 12 were up-regulated at the transcriptional level inCdh23Nonemutant mice (Fig s1c,d). Calpains are activated by Ca2+ions38and can further activate caspase-12, which subsequently activates caspase-9 (intrinsic pathway). (3) As apoptosis was also evident in spiral ganglion, stria vascularis and supporting cells in the mutant mice, disorder in Ca2+regulation and in calcium-dependent cell adhesion in the cochlea may be responsible for triggering apoptosis. (4) CDH23 is a bona fide type I intrinsic membrane protein and is most likely translated on rough ER membranes; therefore, the 70S-P substitution may cause CDH23 misfolding resulting in accumulation of CDH23 in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), with subsequent ER stress followed by apoptosis (Figure 10). (5) It has been reported that a cyclic peptide can perturb cadherin-mediated endothelial cell interactions, resulting in a progressive apoptotic cell death. This effect depends on cell density, as it is only observed when dense cultures are treated with the peptide. 39CDH23 is a member of the cadherin family and could have a similar mechanism of apoptosis. This may also explain why the densely organized OHCs (three rows) were more affected than the more loosely organized IHC (one single row). It has been documented in drug-induced hearing loss models that hair cell loss can occur by apoptosis, and that such loss can be reversed through treatment with the anti-apoptotic drug, Z-VAD-FMK (a powerful, irreversible and cell-permeable inhibitor for caspases). 21We therefore investigated Z-VAD-FMK as a candidate drug for maintenance of hearing and hair cell viability inCdh23Nonemice, though the mechanism of cell death inCdh23Nonemice may differ from that in drug-induced damage. Following Z-VAD-FMK treatment of theCdh23Nonemice, there was a significantly reduced amount of OHC loss compared to that of the untreated or DMSO-treated mice in all regions of the cochlea. The protective effect of Z-VAD-FMK on OHC was further confirmed by significantly higher DPOAE amplitudes in the DMSO+Z-VAD-FMK-treated mice than in the untreated or DMSO-treated mice at the age of 8 weeks. Furthermore, ABR thresholds were preserved at levels approximately 15-40 dB better in the Z-VAD-FMK-treated group than in the untreated or DMSO-treated groups of littermateCdh23Nonemice from 6 weeks to 12 weeks of age. The involvement of apoptosis in the pathology ofCdh23Noneinner ears was thus confirmed by anti-apoptotic drug therapy. Z-VAD-FMK can preserve cells (hair cells, for example) in the inner ears by stopping apoptosis. These results offer the potential that DNFB12 could be preventable in the future by anti-apoptotic intervention. However, the hearing loss of theCdh23Nonemice could not be completely prevented by Z-VAD-FMK treatment in the time course observation, especially at 12 weeks of age, indicating that other factors related to alteration in CDH23 structure may be also involved in the pathology of these mouse inner ears. Additionally, we noticed that DMSO has a minor, but slightly significant, rescue effect on hearing (Figure 6candFigure 9). This is consistent with another recent report. 40A mouse model of DFNB12 was reported recently, in which the mutation salsa was predicted to affect Ca2+binding by altering the extracellular CDH23 domain, resulting in severe hearing loss at P21. 15The early onset and rapid progression of hearing loss in salsa mice may make it difficult to find a time period for drug intervention. Therefore, theCdh23Nonemouse model may provide a better platform for further anti-apoptotic drug screening and testing. In summary, a point mutation in theCdh23gene (208T greater than C) of C57BL/6J mice results in hearing loss around 1 month after birth. Given the strain background on which theerlmutation arose, theCdh23Nonemice also carries theahlmutation; thus, the combination of mutations on the C57BL/6J background produces an accelerated hearing loss phenotype that is well-suited for an experimental model. Theerlmutation influences cell fate by increasing cellular apoptosis which may be attenuated by anti-apoptotic drug therapy. These results may provide avenues for improving hearing in patients with DFNB12 by an anti-apoptosis approach in the near future. Anti-apoptosis drugs could be adapted for preventive pre-clinical application after detailed evaluation of the primary effects and the side effects under various treatment regimens in this mouse model. Because this is a preventive drug, we suggest that only after a patient is clearly genetically diagnosed as DFNB12 younger than a determined age of hearing loss should a patient be included for trial of this drug. Table. S1. Mapping of the mutation in erlong mice. (A) DNA from affected mice and unaffected mice was analyzed for MIT markers (D10Mit166,D10Mit194andD10Mit42) on chromosome 10, which are listed in the top row and indicate the base pair position (NCBI Build 37). The mouse identification numbers (ped#) (column K)and phenotypes (ABR thresholds, db SPL,column E-Hat five month of agecolumn B) are indicated in the 2 top rows. The genotype for each marker is given as: b, homozygous C57BL/6J genotype; c, homozygous C3H/HeJ; and h, heterozygous. The chromosomal intervals that segregate with the mutant phenotype are highlighted with boxes. FourCdh23Noneand 4Cdh23Nonemice at the ages of 2 weeks and 2 months, respectively, were used. The primers forGAPDHandCdh23are described in the methods and the other primers are listed inTable 2. The relative mRNA levels ofCdh23, TNF-alpha, caspase-12, m-Calpainandmu-Calpainwere averaged for each genotype and plotted, with error bars indicating standard error from the mean. The results indicated that there was no significant difference for the relative mRNA levels ofCdh23between theCdh23NoneandCdh23Nonemouse groups (P greater than 0.05). However, the relative mRNA levels ofTNF-alpha, caspase-12, m-Calpainandmu-Calpainwere significantly up-regulated in theCdh23Nonemice at both time points of 2 weeks (a, c) and 2 months (b, d), indicating that multiple apoptosis pathways are involved in the hearing loss of the mutant mice. *Six littermateCdh23None-None-Nonemice and 3Cdh23None-Nonemice at the age of P8 were used. ThreeCdh23None-None-Nonemice received 4 doses of Z-VAD-FMK (1.5mg/kg mouse weight, IP injection in DMSO solvent) at P8, P9, P10 and P13. ThreeCdh23None-None-Noneand threeCdh23None-Nonemice were simultaneously injected with an equivalent dose of DMSO without Z-VAD-FMK. Click and pure tone (8 kHz, 16 kHz, and 32 kHz) ABR thresholds were assessed at P17. We found none of theCdh23None-None-Nonemutants that received Z-VAD-FMK had detectable ABR at 100 dB but theCdh23None-Nonemice had normal ABR thresholds as expected at P17 (data not shown). Figure S2shows the results of H E staining of the basal turn of cochleae from mice at P17 (a-c), with enlarged views of the organ of Corti (OC) region in panels (d-f). Outer hair cells (OHC) were lost in the DMSO sham-treatedCdh23None-None-Nonemice (a,d), and only support cells remained (arrowhead ind). However, as with the DMSO-treatedCdh23None-Nonemice (c,f), the Z-VAD-FMK (in DMSO) treatedCdh23None-None-Nonemice showed intact OHCs (4 arrows ine) in the organ of Corti in multiple serial sections. The results indicate that Z-VAD-FMK treatment can protect OHCs inCdh23v-None-Nonemice, but fails to improve the hearing of the mice. SV, scala vestibuli; SM, scala media; RM, Reissner's membrane; StV, Stria vascularis; SL, spiral ligament; SG, spiral ganglion. Scale bars = 50mum.