Major depression is a multifactorial psychiatric disorder that is responsible for substantial disability worldwide. Despite a high morbidity and mortality, its etiology and pathophysiology are not well defined. Notably, women are more likely to become depressed than men, display higher severity and symptom number, have frequent co-morbid anxiety symptoms, and are more prone to recurring episodes. However, the underlying biological vulnerabilities are not fully characterized yet. Low neurotrophic factor support has been proposed as a unifying hypothesis for reduced cell numbers in frontal cortexNone,Noneand amygdala,None,Nonereduced hippocampal volume. None,NoneThis interpretation is supported by indirect evidence in rodents showing that antidepressant treatments increaseBDNF(protein) and BDNF (mRNA) levels, hippocampalBDNFinfusion is sufficient to produce antidepressant-like effects,None,Noneand BDNF appears necessary for some behavioral responses to antidepressant treatments. None,NoneDirect evidence is more sparse and includes low circulating peripheralBDNFlevels which are normalized by antidepressant treatment,None,Noneand one study showing reduced pro-BDNFNoneand BDNF levelsNonein post-mortem hippocampal tissue of depressed patients. NoneAssociations between BDNF signaling and suicide completion have been made, including reduced BDNF levels in post-mortem hippocampal or midbrain,None-Nonedecrease in TrkB.T1 expressionNonehypermethylation of BDNF promoter/exon IVNoneand an increased risk for violent suicide in subjects carrying a Met allele at the BDNF Val66Met polymorphism. NoneEvidence in MDD patients also suggests an impaired excitation/inhibition balance that is potentially mediated by decreased GABA content, as observed by microarray,Noneimaging studies in occipital and frontal corticesNone,Noneor by transcranial magnetic stimulation paradigms. NoneWe recently reported a downregulation of the neuropeptide somatostatin (SST) in the dorsolateral (DLPFC)Noneand subgenual cingulate (sgACC) corticesNoneof MDD subjects. Expression of SST is dependent on BDNF,Noneand identifies a specific GABA interneuron subtype. NoneNotably, the downregulation of SST was consistently more robust in female MDD subjects. At the neural network level, changes in the structure, function and coordinated activity of cortical and subcortical brain regions are thought to underlie the mood regulation deficit in depression. NoneOur study focused on the amygdala as a critical component of this corticolimbic circuit of mood regulation. NoneEvidence for misregulated amygdala function includes decreased oligodendrocyte numbers and markersNone,Noneand altered/sustained amygdala function in depressed subjects exposed to negative emotionally salient stimuli. NoneHere we investigated molecular changes in the amygdala of female subjects with MDD and report robust downregulation of BDNF and of several BDNF-dependent genes. Notably, this deregulated pattern was recreated by low constitutive or reduced activity-dependent BDNF function in mutant mice and robustly affected SST expression, hence providing evidence in support of low neurotrophic and altered GABA-related functions in MDD. For all subjects, consensus DSM-IV diagnoses of MDD were made by an independent committee of experienced clinical research scientists at a case conference utilizing information obtained from clinical records, toxicology exam and a standardized psychological autopsy. NoneThis latter incorporates a structured interview, conducted by a licensed clinical psychologist with family members of the index subject, to assess diagnosis, psychopathology, medical, social and family histories, as well as history of substance abuse. A symptom score reflecting disease severity was calculated based on the presence at time of death of nine MDD symptoms: depressed mood, anhedonia, appetite disturbance, sleep disturbance, psychomotor change, anergia, self-recrimination, diminished ability to concentrate or make decision, and suicidality. None,NoneEach symptom is scored 0 (absence) or 1 (presence) and the symptom score is sum of the individual symptom scores. 21 pairs of subjects were analyzed (Table 1), consisting of female subjects with MDD and control subjects matched for sex, race, and as closely as possible for age, postmortem interval and brain pH. The pairing protocol has been previously validated as reducing signal variability and inducing higher overall correlations of gene transcript levels compared to non-matched pairs. NoneAll subjects died suddenly without prolonged agonal periods. All cases and controls except one pair were white Caucasian. Brains were analyzed for adequate brain pH ( greater than 6.4) and RNA integrity by optical density (OD greater than = 1.6) and Agilent bioanalyzer analysis (Agilent Technologies, Palo Alto, CA; RIN expert scoring system greater than = 7) as described. NoneAccordingly, subject groups did not differ in mean age, PMI, brain pH, RNA integrity number (RIN), or RNA ratio (p greater than 0.05). Rates of death by suicide, disease recurrence, evidence for antidepressant treatment at time of death, and alcohol dependence in MDD subjects were recorded. Toxicological screens on peripheral fluids identified the presence of at least one antidepressant in 14 subjects. (Table 1), while no psychoactive substance was detected in controls. Rostral amygdala samples enriched in lateral, basolateral, and basomedian nuclei were delineated as described previously,Nonedissected from frozen coronal blocks ~2cm caudal to the temporal pole. Total RNA was processed for Illumina HT12 microarray analysis according to the microarray manufacturer's protocol (Illumina Inc, San Diego, CA). Gene selection was made using a random-intercept statistical model (RIM) to adjust for clinical, demographic and technical variables (Details insupplements). Multiple testing was adjusted by the Benjamini-Hochberg method. NoneNoneThe resulting exploratory list (n=4131 genes; 307 genes with fold change greater than 20%) may carry a higher rate of false positives at the single gene level, but allowed investigation of cumulative effects over larger sets of genes and pathways (See BDNF-related genes and Ingenuity Pathway analysis). Antisense and sense riboprobes for human SST mRNA were transcribed in the presence of [35S]-CTP (Amersham Biosciences, Piscataway, NJ) as described. NoneThe sections and [14C]-standards were exposed on the same BioMax MR film (Kodak, Rochester, NY) for 3 days and analyzed with the MCID software. Acetone precipitation of proteins was carried out following RNA extraction. Western blot analysis was performed as described. NoneDual signals were detected using the LI-COR Odyssey Infrared imaging system (LI-COR Biosciences, Lincoln, NE, USA), andSSTorBDNFsignal ratios to beta-actin were calculated. Samples were processed in matched pairs on the same gel and results were replicated for a total of three different western blots. Female BDNF+/+ and +/- mice (3 to 4 months old) were bred on a mixed S129/Sv*C57BL/6 genetic background. Heterozygous adult female mice with one functional BDNF allele (BDNFNone) exhibit 50% reduction of BDNF mRNA levels in the hippocampus. NoneFemale BDNF exon IV KO (BDNFNone) mice were crossed on C57BL/6 as described. NoneBrains were rapidly removed and flash-frozen on dry ice. Caudo-rostral coronal sections were obtained on a cryostat until the caudal amygdala was observed (Fig #48,None). Brains were then flipped and cut rostro-caudally until observing the rostral amygdala (Fig #40). Bi-lateral amygdalae were then micro-punctured using 0.5mm diameter punches and stored in Trizol at -80 degrees C.Small PCR products were amplified in quadruplets on a Mastercycler real-time PCR machine (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany), using universal PCR conditions. Results were calculated as the geometric mean of relative intensities compared to three validated internal controls (actin, glyceraldehyde-3- phosphate dehydrogenase, and cyclophilin G). See detailed methods inSupplements. Using a microarray approach in the amygdala of postmortem female MDD subjects compared to matched controls and taking clinical and technical parameters into account, we identified 116 gene transcripts as differentially expressed after controlling for multiple testing (q-value 0.05; effect size 20%; q-list,Table 2andSupplementary Table ST1). Based on previous identification of relative glial/neuronal enrichments in gene transcript origin,None23 gene transcript changes were of neuronal origin and mostly down-regulated (~80%), 56 of mixed neuronal/glial origin (22 down, 34 up) and 31 of enriched glial origin and mostly upregulated (~87%). Notably, among the most down-regulated genes in each subcategory were SST, NPY, RGS4, CORT, and TAC1 (Table 2), in a pattern strikingly reminiscent to that previously reported in the cortex of male mice with low BDNF,Nonethus suggesting that a deficit in BDNF function may have contributed to the gene pattern observed in MDD. We further explored this putative BDNF link by investigating a broader list of genes identified as BDNF-related in the Ingenuity Pathway database (n=283 genes). 52 BDNF-related genes displayed significant uncorrected MDD-affected changes (Supplementary Table 2) and BDNF-related genes were significantly over-represented in the q-list of MDD-affected gene list (6%vs.1.2% in Ingenuity database; chi2=17.4, df=1, p less than 0.0001). Further Ingenuity-based exploratory functional analyses resulted in buildings of gene networks and canonical pathways coherent with our findings (Supplementary Figure S1). Microarray results for 13 genes in the MDD q-list (AMPH, CDK5RAP2, CORT, GFAP, KCNG1, MBP, MOBP, NPY, RGS4, SLC32A1, SST, SSTR1, TAC1) were confirmed by qPCR (Supplementary Table ST3), with a high Array/qPCR concordance (Pearson correlation r=0.95, p less than 1e-6) and similar directionality of expression for all genes (Figure 1A). Exploratory analysis (i.e. unadjusted p-values) identified additional downregulated GABA-related genes (GAD1, GAD2, GABRA1, GABRA5, calretinin (CALB2)) and genes coding for receptors (HTR3A) found on GABAergic neurons in the amygdala,Nonebut these findings were not reliably confirmed (Supplementary Table ST3), potentially reflecting array false positives or a diluting effect from other unaffected GABA neuron subsets in the qPCR cDNA samples. For instance, parvalbumin (PV), a marker of a different GABA neuron subset, was not affected in our cohort. Due to low detection by array, we measured BDNF by qPCR and western blotting. Results indicate significant decreases in MDD subjects of mRNA levels corresponding to the BDNF coding sequence (BDNF exon IXd; -22%; p less than 0.05,Figure 1B) and protein level, for both the precursor (pro-) and mature (m-) forms (respectively, -27% and -30%; p less than 0.05,Figure 1C-E). LowBDNFwas observed regardless of the presence of antidepressant treatment (Figure 1E). BDNF-IXd expression was co-regulated across all samples with the four core genes involved in the BDNF-related signature (SST, NPY, RGS4 and TAC1; Average R=0.39, p less than 0.05), suggesting a functional link, however the coregulation with BDNF was lower than mutual coregulation within those four genes (Average R=0.57, p less than 0.01) (Supplementary Table ST4), suggesting the presence of additional regulatory events. BDNF transcription is initiated from at least nine promoters that respond to differing stimuli and drive transcription of a short-noncoding exon spliced to a common coding exon. NoneFor example, promoter IV is highly responsive to neuronal activity and induces activity-dependent BDNF expressionin vitroandin vivo. NoneUsing qPCR, we report no difference in expression levels for selected activity-dependent (I, IV and IXa) BDNF promoter/non-coding exons, although we note the limits of assessing short term and activity-dependent gene activities under variable postmortem intervals for brain collection. No changes were observed in mRNA coding for TrkB (full length or truncated forms;Supplementary Figure S2). Although clinical and technical parameters were accounted for in the single-gene statistical models, we further investigated potential effects of selected parameters on the 52 BDNF-related genes as a whole (Supplementary Table ST2). We previously reported that disease-associated genes, including BDNF, are robustly modulated by age. NoneAccordingly, we observed a correlation between age and the 52 BDNF related-gene set (averaged relative change and age; R=0.44, p=0.004; SeeSupplementary Figure S3); however, the effect of MDD on BDNF-related genes was still highly significant after ANCOVA analysis with age as cofactor (p=8.8e-4). The details of relation between age and gene expression in MDD will be discussed elsewhere. Nonewas detected in 2/3 of subjects at time of death, but data on long-term exposure and treatment efficacy was not available. BDNF levels in MDD subjects did not correspond to antidepressant treatment. Moreover the levels of expression changes for 52 BDNF-related genes with nominal MDD p-values less than 0.05 were not different between treated and untreated MDD subjects (Supplementary Table ST2; Pearson correlation, r=0.91, p less than 1e-7). We further investigated potential antidepressant effects on orthologous genes in a mouse model of antidepressant response. In that study, 4-week chronic fluoxetine exposure reversed the high emotionality phenotype induced by chronic mild stress in mice. NoneWith the exception of two genes (ACAT2 and RAPGEF6) antidepressant did not affect expression of orthologous genes from the MDD-related q-list (Table 2andSupplementary Tables ST1-2). Nonewas used as a covariate in all statistical analysis performed and did not interfere with any of the positive results provided herein. The cohort encompasses a large age range and information on hormonal status and replacement therapy was largely not available. So, we hypothesized that the transcriptional activation of genes involved in regulating estrogen function (CYP19A1, ESR1, ESR2, PGR and SULT1A1) or for genes proposed as peripheral biomarkers of menopausal status (AMH),Nonemay represent a useful proxy assay for hormonal status. The expression levels of these genes did not correlate with BDNF-related transcript changes (Supplementary Figure S4). For each depressed subject, a symptom score reflecting the severity of the disease was calculated based on the presence at time of death of nine MDD episode symptoms (Methods)None. Score values showed no correlation with changes in the expression of any of the BDNF-related gene, suggesting that intensity of changes were independent of disease' severity (Supplementary Table ST2). The disease effect sizes on BDNF-related genes were reduced in suicide versus non-suicide MDD subjects (Supplementary Figure S5), but BDNF mRNA and pro-BDNF protein levels (but not mBDNF) were further decreased in depressed suicide victims (mRNA: alrsuicide/ctrl=-0.41 vs alrnon-suicide/ctrl=-0.28, p=0.34; pro-BDNF protein: alrsuicide/ctrl=-0.62 vs alrnon-suicide/ctrl=-0.47, p=0.28), although not significantly, potentially due to reduced sample size. We next investigated if similar changes were observed downstream from low BDNF in the amygdala of mutant mice with altered BDNF function. To differentiate the putative contribution of constitutive and activity-dependent BDNF functions, we investigated gene transcript changes in mice heterozygous for a constitutive deletion of the BDNF gene (BDNFNone), which display ~50% less BDNF;Noneand mice with a targeted disruption of exon IV (BDNFNone), which results in a near complete blockade of activity-dependent BDNF protein expression. NoneUsing qPCR, 6 core genes of interest were investigated, based on confirmed changes in MDD and known BDNF-dependency, including SNAP25, a BDNF-regulated gene memberNoneof the SNARE complex, also observed downregulated in MDDNone(Table 3). In addition, we evaluated the expression of 5 other GABA-related genes displaying less robust changes (array results not qPCR-confirmed), and parvalbumin (PV) as a control GABA marker not affected in our cohort. qPCR results confirmed the BDNF-dependency for most genes in amygdala, but neither line of mutant mice mimicked the full pattern of MDD changes. Instead, gene changes in BDNFNoneand BDNFNonedisplayed complementary profiles (Table 3), which together recreated the MDD profile, suggesting a combined low activity-dependent and constitutive BDNF function in MDD. SST and NPY were identified at the intersection of the BDNFNoneand BDNFNoneprofiles, hence identifying SST/NPY GABA interneurons as the most vulnerable GABA interneuron subtype to low BDNF function (Table 2). Low SST was confirmed by qPCR (Supplementary Table ST3). Usingin situhybridization, SST mRNA expression was significantly decreased in the lateral (p less than 0.01) and basomedial (p less than 0.05) amygdaloid nuclei in MDD subjects compared to control subjects (Figure 2A-C). SST expression was overall lower in the basolateral nucleus and not significantly different between control and MDD subjects (p=0.146). LowSSTwas also observed at the precursor protein level by quantitative Western blot analysis (Figure 2D-E). NoneFinally, the correlation between mRNA levels of BDNF with SST levels (r=0.56, p less than 0.0001) was also observed at the protein level (r=0.59, p less than 0.0001). We report robust gene transcript changes in the postmortem amygdala of female subjects with MDD. The pattern of altered transcripts in the most significantly dysregulated genes was reminiscent of changes observed in mice with low BDNF. Accordingly, we detected in human MDD subjects a significant downregulation of BDNF at the RNA and protein levels, confirmed the presence of a broader profile of low BDNF-related changes, and independently verified results by qPCR for several genes, including SST and NPY, two markers for a specific subset of GABA interneurons. We show that the core profile of BDNF-dependent gene dysregulation is recreated by the union of complementary patterns of gene transcript changes downstream from either low constitutive or activity-dependent BDNF function in mice. This suggests a model where parsimonious BDNF deficits may result in distinct molecular profiles, cellular deficits including increased vulnerability of SST-bearing GABA neurons, leading to potentially combinatorial pathological phenotypes. The robust findings observed here in human and rodent cohorts, in concert with supporting SST-related female-biased findings in sgACC and DLPFC,None,Nonesuggest that female-specific factors (such as organizational or activational hormonal effects) contribute an added biological vulnerability to MDD. In summary, these results provide both direct (low BDNF) and indirect (low-BDNF-dependent gene profile) evidence in support of the low neurotrophin hypothesis of MDD, while also linking it to the low GABA hypothesis of depression. Multiple known etiological factors affect BDNF, including, genetic, naturalistic (aging,Noneexercise,NonestressNone) and biochemical (serotonin, IGF-1)Nonefactors. Hence, low BDNF activity is not specific to MDD, and also observed in schizophrenia,Nonedementia and neurodegenerative disorders. NoneSo, low BDNF and associated downstream gene changes can be considered a true intermediate molecular phenotype, which is associated with specific upstream etiological factors and putative downstream molecular/cellular effects (Figure 3). Here, our studies in MDD suggest an origin/cause that includes a combination of activity-dependent and constitutive deficits in BDNF, while the downstream proximal effects include molecular (altered GABA markers) and potentially pathophysiological effects (altered GABA-related microcircuitry function). This model can account for how the low function of a common and widely distributed neurotrophic factor such as BDNF can be implicated in multiple disorders, and yet may still lead to disease-specific outcomes. It also provides a perspective on why low BDNF may not be causative of a particular DSM-IV diagnosis, but instead contributes one set of changes to complex molecular pathologies of those illnesses, where "complexity" reflects an array of parallel and interacting biological pathologies (defined as pathogenic modules inFigure 3), each with their own etiological factors and mediating pathways. In MDD, such patterns may result from individual genetic liability, prior biological insults (i.e., infection, inflammation), altered developmental trajectories, or biochemical exposure (i.e., interferon or glucocorticoids) for instance. Similar remarks could apply to SST downregulation, which has been reported in schizophrenia,Nonebipolar disorder,NoneAlzheimer'sNone, during normal agingNone, and across brain regions in MDD. None,NoneHere, the rodent findings convincingly suggest that low SST represents a common phenotype downstream of altered BDNF function (Table 3), and could thus be considered an obligate molecular/cellular consequence across BDNF-linked illnesses. In that sense, low SST could be viewed as a consequence of disease-related events, but its contribution (i.e. cause), in the amygdala or other regions, to clinical phenotypes is not known. SST is expressed in a subgroup of ~20% of GABA interneurons that provide delayed and sustained inhibition onto principal pyramidal neurons through dense projections onto dendritic arbors, and to some extent may provide unspecific normalizing inhibition (at least in mouse cortex). NoneHence, low SST is unlikely to remain biologically silent at the GABA microcircuitry level. However, this will depend on (1) whether all SST neurons are affected or whether a portion of SST cells are missing, (2) whether GABA function itself is affected in SST neurons, or (3) if deficits are specific to altered neuromodulatory peptides within those cell population, as SST, NPY and CORT (all reported low here) share similarities in cellular origins and may be implicated in the disease process on their own. Moreover, the impact of low SST is expected to vary based on the broader GABA microcircuitry pathological context. For instance, changes in PV-expressing GABA neurons which directly target the cell soma and axon (Figure 3) (or other subtypes), are poised to interact with SST neuron-mediated inhibition, and may accordingly translate into distinct pyramidal cell regulation, pathophysiological network activity and potentially symptom-related behavioral outcomes such as schizophrenia and bipolar disorderNone,None. Upstream factors affecting SST (e.g. aging, stress, glutamate) also affect additional biological modules (Figure 3). Together, it is expected that the combinatorial recruitment of different modules through various (and potentially interacting) etiological pathways will together result in complex disease-related patterns. We propose that BDNF, BDNF-dependent SST and other related gene changes, represent one of those complex biological modules, with its own risk factors and modulators. Finally, brain region-specificities in terms of cellular composition and intrinsic vulnerabilities may further determine pathophysiological outcomes. We speculate that the changes observed here in the amygdala, an area specialized in detecting and assessing emotional salience of incoming stimuli, will contribute to altered stimulus integration, and in turn to increased and sustained reactivity of the amygdala in MDD patients,Nonealthough this hypothesis will need to be tested in genetic rodent systems. Post-mortem analyses do not allow discriminating if observed alterations are causative and/or consequential to mental illness, but dissecting disease pathways is possible in mouse models. However, the prediction of the model described above (Figure 3) is that current genetic mutations in mice do not recapitulate the full context and complexity of molecular changes observed in illness and so that they will only partially test causal link with altered behavior. For instance, decreased BDNF has been observed in rodents after chronic stress,Nonebut not consistentlyNone, and low BDNF by itself is not sufficient to generate an anxious/depressive-like phenotype,None,Noneand in some regions can exert antidepressant-like effects. NoneOn the other hand, disruption of BDNF (global or forebrain-specific)None,Noneleads to higher emotionality when combined with exposure to chronic stress in female mice,None,Nonewhile male BDNFNonewere as vulnerable as WT to chronic stress. NoneDipping further in BDNF specificity, mice lacking the activity-dependent BDNF promoter-IV appear more prone to develop increased emotionality. NoneSimilarly, SST gene disruption in mice does not induce behavioral alterations other than motor impairment,Nonesuggesting that low SST by itself is not sufficient to induce anxious/depressive-like states. However, the behavioral studies in SSTKOmutant mice may not have been optimized to detect subtle baseline/trait changes, were performed in compromised mice with complete loss of SST function, and did not assess increased vulnerability to develop higher emotionality, such as after inducing stress protocols for instance. -SST and co-expressed genes(NPY, CORT, TAC1) were used as surrogates for GABA function, but it remains to be determined whether markers for GABA function within SST neurons or only neuropeptides are affected. Indeed, SST itself displays antidepressant activity that is GABA-independent. None-Sex and species differences. A direct comparison of female and male cohorts will be needed to fully assess the higher vulnerability of females in developing BDNF-related profiles. The goal of current study was to use the increased disease prevalence in female subjects as an enrichment strategy for a potential more homogeneous underlying molecular pathology. Our prior study in the amygdala of male subjectsNonesuggests that the phenotype may not be as robust in male subjects, although we cannot at this point determine whether this was due to cohort heterogeneity or to smaller sample size. Nevertheless, neuroimaging reports on the impact of altered BDNF function on amygdala response to stressful stimulation, and pathways to depression and anxietyNone,Nonesuggest that the uncovered changes in BDNF pathway may be equally relevant to male and female subjects. Increased molecular profiles in female subjects are supported by our prior studies of SST in cingulate and DLPFCNone,None, and BDNF-related profiles were not observed in the amygdala of male depressed subjects. NoneBiological differences in disease processes or clinical specificities of that cohort (familial MDD) may underlie these results. Finally, it should be noted that numerous other genes were observed differentially expressed in this study (Table S2), including metabolic-, energetic-, vascular- and glial-related changes, which will need to be further investigated. We have focused on the impact of low BDNF on GABA markers, but our microarray study also confirmed genes previously reported affected in the context of stress regulation and/or mood disorders, such as NPY, TAC1 and RGS4. Indeed, individuals with low NPY display an increase in neural responsivity to negative stimuli and appear overrepresented in subjects with MDD. None,NoneTAC1 has been associated with bipolar mood disorders,Noneand the tachykininergic system may be a target for new therapeutic opportunities. Decreased RGS4 DLPFC levels have been reported in schizophrenia,Noneand RGS4 polymorphisms appear associated with depression factors in this illness. NoneFinally, while expression of SNAP25 seems higher in prefrontal cortex in schizophrenia,Nonealterations in its levels have been reported in ventral hippocampus of depressed subjects,Nonesuggesting a disease-differential BDNF-activity regulation of this SNARE complex member.