Organisms from all kingdoms of life are able to perceive environmental stimuli required for adaptation to their habitats. The facultatively phototrophic alphaproteobacteriumRhodobacter sphaeroidesis remarkably versatile in adjusting its energy generation to environmental cues. Aerobic respiration is the preferred mode of deriving energy. A decrease in oxygen tension activates expression of genes that encode components of the photosynthetic apparatus. This prepares the organism for using photosynthesis as an alternative energy source upon oxygen depletion. At intermediate oxygen levels, however, when photosynthesis genes are partially expressed in the dark, light inhibits the formation of the photosynthetic apparatus because the combination of oxygen and photosynthesis results in photo-oxidative stressNone. Light and oxygen are perceived and integrated by the AppA-PpsR regulatory system, where PpsR is a master repressor of photosynthesis genes and AppA a light and oxygen sensitive anti-repressorNone-Nonethat can form a non-covalent AppA-PpsR2complexNone. AppA senses blue-light via its N-terminal sensor ofblue-lightusingFAD (BLUF) domainNone,None,Noneand oxygen via its SCHIC (sensorcontaininghemeinstead ofcobalamin) domain that also mediates the AppA-PpsR2interactionNone,None. The cysteine-rich C-terminus of AppA is dispensable for oxygen-sensingNone. The multi-domain proteinNonePpsR consists of three PAS domains (designated N-domainNone,None, PAS1 and PAS2), a glutamine-rich region (Q-linker) and ahelix-turn-helix (HTH) motif (Fig. 1None) for binding to palindromic DNA (TGTc-N10-gACA)None. A redox-sensitive cysteine residue in the HTH domainNonewas reported to form an intramolecular disulfide bondNone. In addition, PpsR can interact with hemeNone. The basis of light-dependent signaling by AppA-PpsR has remained unclear. Biochemical data suggest the formation of an AppA-PpsR2complex in the dark that dissociates upon illuminationNone. Molecular details of such a mechanism are, however, unknown and crystalNone,Noneand solutionNonestructures have only been determined of the isolated BLUF domain, providing limited mechanistic insights to light-induced conformational changesNone,None. Therefore, we set out to obtain structural insights into the light-dependence of AppA-PpsR2interactions and their consequences on DNA-binding. Here, we present crystal structures of AppA, PpsR and an AppA-PpsR2core complex. Based on functional studies and structural analysis of light-induced changes usingHydrogen-Deuterium exchange coupled tomassspectrometry (HDX-MS), we propose a direct light-signaling mechanism via a ternary AppA-PpsR-DNA complex. We show that AppA-PpsR2stability is only mildly affected by blue-light. Rather, this complex interacts with PpsR-binding sites on DNA preventing formation of the PpsR-DNA repressor complex in a light-dependent manner. Together, these results highlight details of the molecular mechanism and provide a new model of light-modulated regulation of photosynthesis genes inR. sphaeroides. To understand how blue-light sensing in AppA affects DNA-binding of PpsR, we generated protein constructs encompassing the domains required for protein complex formation and light-signal transduction (Fig. 1None). We addressed the oligomeric state of full-length PpsR, which is described as either a dimerNoneor tetramerNone, bymulti-anglelight-scattering (MALS) analysis coupled to size exclusion chromatography. Quantification of the average molar mass yielded ~150 kDa (Fig. 1None), suggesting a trimer based on 51 kDa per monomer. However, pronounced peak tailing and a continuous decrease of the molar mass signal (Fig. 1None) suggested a dynamic equilibrium of PpsR tetramers and dimers. We quantified this transition usingmicroscalethermophoresis (MST,Supplementary Note) and obtained aKdof 0.9 muM for the 2 PpsR2? PpsR4equilibrium based on PpsR2concentration (Fig. 1Noneinset). If not indicated otherwise, the AppA construct used throughout this study was AppA Delta399 C20S (seeSupplementary NoteandSupplementary Figure 1None,None,None,None), which is subsequently referred to as AppADeltaC. We quantified the AppADeltaCinteraction with dimeric PpsR (AppA-PpsR2stoichiometryNone) using MST and determined aKdof 1.3 muM for AppADeltaC-PpsR2(Fig. 1None). Interestingly, the higher kinetic stability of AppADeltaC-PpsR2(Supplementary Fig. 1None) compared to PpsR4(Fig. 1None) observed upon gel filtration suggests that also association and dissociation kinetics influence the available concentration of molecular species thereby affecting light-sensing and DNA-binding. Unexpectedly, we observed no light-induced dissociation of AppADeltaC-PpsR2, as described previouslyNone, when performing gel filtration experiments with continuous illumination at AppADeltaCconcentrations above theKd. Illumination rather induced changes in elution volumes for AppADeltaCand AppADeltaC-PpsR2, indicating conformational changes of both species (Supplementary Fig. 2None). To circumvent the problem of limited light penetration into the column, we performed nativepolyacrylamidegelelectrophoresis (PAGE) under dark and light conditions (Supplementary Fig. 2None,None). These experiments confirmed the light stability of the binary complex and we observed a retardation of AppADeltaC-PpsR2migration similar to the size exclusion experiments (Supplementary Fig. 2None). Semi-quantitative evaluation of the AppADeltaC-PpsR2affinity (Fig. 2None) showed that complex stability is only mildly affected by illumination. Theeffectiveconcentration for 50% response (EC50) increases only 1.6-fold from dark (1.4 muM) to light (2.3 muM). Additional experiments performed with an AppA variant (Q63E) locked in the light state further confirmed that light-activated AppA interacts with PpsR (Supplementary Fig. 2None,None). Since light-activation of AppA affects PpsR-mediated transcriptional regulation, we characterized the influence of AppA on PpsR-DNA interaction. Usingelectrophoreticmobilityshiftassays (EMSAs,Supplementary Fig. 3None) we measured PpsR-binding to a 70basepair (bp) (namedpuc I) or 250 bp (puc II) DNA fragment, both containing the two palindromes of theR. sphaeroides pucpromoter and differing only in their extensions. Semi-quantitative data evaluation showed the characteristic cooperative binding (Fig. 2None) described previouslyNone,None. Using the Hill equation we obtained anEC50of 1 muM and a Hill-coefficient of 4.3 +/- 0.3 for DNA-binding, which corresponds to the theoretical maximum for the four binding sites present in twopucpalindromes. Four HTH motifs provided by a PpsR tetramer are theoretically sufficient to interact with all four binding sites; however, an active-site titration of PpsR with DNA (Fig. 2Noneinset andSupplementary Fig. 3None) indicated that eight PpsR molecules are required for saturation ofpuc II. To characterize the influence of AppA on DNA-binding properties of PpsR, we tested different concentrations of AppADeltaC. Below 1 muM the apparent affinity of PpsR forpuc Iwas slightly reduced compared to PpsR alone (Supplementary Fig. 3None), as reported previouslyNone,None. Interestingly, we noted an additional faint band and increasing the AppADeltaCconcentration to 1.5 muM resulted in an increase of intensity of this newly observed species, indicating the formation of a ternary AppADeltaC-PpsR-puc Icomplex (Fig. 2NoneandSupplementary Fig. 3None). Importantly, even an excess of PpsR was not able to compete with AppADeltaC-PpsR2for DNA, suggesting a higher affinity or higher kinetic stability of the ternary complex. A comparison of the transitions from free to bound DNA (~0.5-1.5 muM vs. ~0.25-2.5 muM PpsR for PpsR8vs. AppADeltaC-PpsR2, respectively,Supplementary Fig. 3Nonevs. Fig. 2None) demonstrates that the ternary complex is formed at lower PpsR concentrations compared to PpsR8and that AppADeltaC-PpsR2-binding to DNA shows reduced cooperativity. While previous studies propose light-induced AppA-PpsR2dissociationNone, our new results of its light-response and the observation of an AppA-PpsR2-puccomplex warrant analysis of the light-influence on this ternary system. To that end, we compared EMSAs performed with varying concentrations of the individual components under dark (Fig. 2None) and light conditions (Fig. 2None). At 1.5 muM AppADeltaCand increasing concentrations of PpsR the fraction of PpsR-bound DNA increased upon illumination (Fig. 2None) due to the light-dependent dissociation of AppADeltaC-PpsR2(Supplementary Fig. 3None), as suggested previouslyNone. However, similar experiments with higher AppADeltaCconcentrations (5 muM AppADeltaC, 3 muM PpsR - to form the binary complex irrespective of light) demonstrated that illumination reduces the affinity of AppADeltaC-PpsR2for DNA (Fig. 2NoneandSupplementary Fig. 3None). This is indicated by the disappearance of the ternary complex and a smear towards free DNA, which is then available to uncomplexed PpsR (5 muM AppADeltaC, 13 muM PpsR) for binding (Fig. 2Nonelane 3). This again highlights the importance of the kinetic stability of different species involved in the light response. A detailed analysis of ternary complex illumination at AppADeltaCconcentrations (20 muM) enabling formation of AppADeltaC-PpsR2throughout the PpsR titration range (0-30 muM,Fig. 2None), showed that stable ternary complex formation occurs only at one order of magnitude higher PpsR concentrations compared to dark conditions (Fig. 2None). However, a quantitative comparison is complicated because the cooperativity of DNA-binding and the kinetics of ternary complex disassembly are affected by illumination. To identify elements affected by illumination, we solved the crystal structure of AppADeltaCto 2.6 A resolution (Table 1), revealing molecular details beyond the BLUF domain. A schematic and cartoon representation of the overall structure is shown inFigure 3None,NoneandSupplementary Figure 4. The core BLUF domain closely resembles the structure of the isolated domain (root mean square deviation (RMSD) 0.3 A to AppA BLUF 1-124None), in particular, strand beta5B_A(subscripts denote the domain and the protein withBLUF, 4HB andSCHIC forAppA andN, PAS1and PAS2forPpsR) displays a kink corresponding to the TrpoutconformationNone. Interestingly, Trp104 is sandwiched between the core beta-sheet of the BLUF domain and an amphipathic helix (aminoacid (aa) 141-162) capping this beta-sheet (Fig. 3None). To exclude that the C20S substitution causes the Trpoutorientation, we solved the AppA Delta399 wild-type structure (pdb 4HH1) showing an identical Trp104 conformation. The linker between the BLUF and SCHIC domains consists of the BLUF capping helix, some stretches without secondary structure elements, followed by a four helix bundle (4HB). The SCHIC domain has a flavodoxin-like fold as expected from its relationship with the cobalamin-binding superfamilyNone. Structural details of the SCHIC domain are described in theSupplementary NoteandSupplementary Figure 4None. An interesting feature of the AppADeltaCstructure is the weak interaction between the BLUF and SCHIC domains. A surface representation (Supplementary Fig. 4None) suggests that both domains use the linker region and the 4HB as "binding platforms" without strong interactions at the BLUF-SCHIC interface. This is in line with the current view that AppA integrates two stimuli and communicates them to PpsR. Comparative HDX experiments performed under identical experimental conditions for two states of a protein provide information on their structural differences. Therefore, HDX is ideally suited for complementing crystallographic studies in terms of AppA-PpsR2complex formation and illumination. In addition, differences in deuterium exchange kinetics correlate with secondary structure stability (Supplementary NoteandFig. 3None). Figure 3Noneshows the overall structure of AppADeltaCcolored according to the observed changes in deuterium uptake between light- and dark-states (DeltaDrelrepresents the absolute difference in relative deuterium incorporation). Shades of red correspond to elements with an increased deuterium uptake in the light-state, representing a destabilization of secondary structure or deprotection due to loss of interaction. Accordingly, blue indicates stabilization upon complex formation or an increase in secondary structure stability. Full details of all comparative experiments are shown inSupplementary Movies 1-6. Interestingly, changes in deuterium uptake at initial time points are restricted to the BLUF domain and the capping helix. A substantial stabilization upon illumination is observed for the (alpha1-beta2)B_Aelement, including Ser41 and Asn45 interacting with the flavin cofactor, and the beta5B_Astrand containing Met106. Importantly, the central part of the capping helix becomes slightly destabilized upon illumination, suggesting an involvement in light-signal integration. To obtain a better understanding of PpsR, we set out to determine its structure. We crystallized a construct lacking the HTH motif (PpsRDeltaHTH,Fig. 4None) and determined the structure to 2.8 A resolution (Table 1). This revealed a tetrameric assembly of the triple PAS protein in the asymmetric unit (Fig. 4None), which is composed of two antiparallel dimers each having a parallel dimerization interface ranging from the N-terminal PAS domain (N-domain) via the alpha-helical Q-linker (alphaQ) to the PAS1 domain. While the PAS2 domains also form a homodimer, the overall dimer symmetry is broken due to interaction of the PAS2 domains with alphaQ of the other dimer. Based on the C-termini of the PAS2 domains the position of the HTH motif is expected to be close to alphaQ of the second dimer (Fig. 4NoneandSupplementary Fig. 5) which might contribute to the strong evolutionary conservation of this region (Supplementary Fig. 6None). While structural rearrangements upon DNA-binding cannot be excluded, the distant positioning of two HTH dimers in the tetramer is unlikely to result in efficient binding ofpucpalindromes that are separated by a half-turn of the DNA double-helix. Interestingly, alphaQ provides another antiparallel oligomerization interface with a symmetry-related tetramer, thereby forming an octameric assembly (Supplementary Fig. 5None,None). In this case, the proposed location of the HTH motifs would be ideally positioned for DNA-binding (Fig. 4None), explaining the cooperativity and the 1:8 stoichiometry ofpuc:PpsR binding, respectively, as derived from our active-site titration. We addressed structural changes of AppADeltaC-PpsR2formation and illumination by HDX (Fig. 4None,None,None,None). The complex formation induced changes in deuterium exchange mapped onto the structures (Fig. 4None,None) show a pronounced stabilization of the 4HB and the BLUF capping helix in AppADeltaC. In addition, the N-terminal region of SCHIC, extending from the linker to the 4HB via (beta1, alpha1, beta2 to alpha2)S_Aexperiences a reduction in deuterium exchange upon complex formation. Several of these elements show above average deuterium incorporation in free AppADeltaC(Fig. 3None). Interestingly, not only the capping helix but also additional light-responsive BLUF elements show changes upon complex formation. While the (alpha1-beta2)B_Aregion is destabilized in the presence of PpsR, the beta5B_Astrand shows a similar stabilization to that observed upon illumination. In addition, the (beta1-alpha1)B_Aand (beta5-capping helix)B_Aloop regions become stabilized upon complex formation. Deuterium incorporation characteristics of PpsR alone (Supplementary Fig. 6None) demonstrated that, similar to AppA, regions involved in complex formation (Fig. 4None) belong to elements with above average deuterium incorporation. This is most pronounced for parts of the Q-linker region that exhibit bimodal deuterium incorporation characteristics (EX1 kineticsNone) reflecting complex dissociation during labeling (Supplementary Fig. 6None). This extreme form of deuterium exchange is caused by a faster chemical exchange rate of free PpsR compared to the re-association kinetics of the protected AppADeltaC-PpsR2species. This is supported by HDX experiments performed with different AppA concentrations (Supplementary Fig. 6None). Analysis of the titration curve using the law of mass action provided aKdestimate of ~1.5 muM, in agreement with our MST data. Additional elements with pronounced stabilization are observed in the N-domain including loops around alpha1N_Pand alpha3N_P. Similarly, beta41_Pand beta51_Pand their connecting loop become stabilized upon complex formation. Interestingly, the PAS2 domain behaves opposite and complex formation leads to destabilization of the alpha32_P, beta42_Pand beta52_Pelements, which, given the AppA-PpsR2stoichiometry, supports a role of this region in PpsR homo-tetramerization as seen in the crystal structure (Fig. 4None). In addition, this suggests an interaction interface of AppA on alphaQ preventing PpsR oligomerization by blocking the PAS2-binding site. The HTH region (Fig. 5None-None) shows only sub-threshold stabilization upon complex formation, which indicates that AppADeltaCdoes not prevent DNA-binding of PpsR by interacting with the HTH motif. HDX measurements of light-adapted AppADeltaC-PpsR2additionally support that illumination does not lead to complex dissociation (Fig. 4None,None), due to sustained stabilization of alphaQ and the N- and PAS1-elements described above. The light-red color of a part of alphaQ corresponds to only ~10 % of the stabilization upon complex formation and can be explained with a small, light-induced reduction in AppA-PpsR2concentration due to experimental conditions limiting light-independent saturation of the binary system (cf. Fig. 2None). Therefore, the N-Q-PAS1 domains of PpsR form a light-independent core binding interface with AppA. The PAS2 domain, on the other hand, shows partial reversibility of changes observed upon complex formation. Most importantly, the C-terminal HTH motif is pronouncedly stabilized, showing EX1-like kinetics for peptides from this region (Fig. 5None). This might originate either from a light-state AppA-induced HTH dimerization or interaction with light-responsive AppA elements. HDX changes induced by illumination of PpsR-complexed AppADeltaCare clustered around the BLUF domain and partially correspond to observations of isolated AppADeltaC. Substantial stabilization is observed in the (alpha1-beta2)B_Aregion while the central part of the capping helix partially reverts to a more flexible state (Fig. 5None-None). Apart from these changes only the region between the pairs of helices in the 4HB (aa 213-222) is destabilized. The remaining elements in the 4HB and the SCHIC domain are unaffected by illumination and therefore belong to the core interface defined for PpsR above. Importantly, the observation of light-responsive elements from the BLUF core via the capping helix to PAS2 and the DNA-binding HTH motif provides a basis for direct light-regulation in the binary complex. Based on core complex regions identified by HDX, we generated corresponding constructs of AppA (4HB-SCHIC) and PpsR (N-Q-PAS1). We crystallized their complex and determined its structure to 1.75 A resolution (Table 1). The observed assembly matches the AppA-PpsR2stoichiometry and confirms the binding of AppA to alphaQ (Fig. 6None). Additional interactions of AppA with the N- and PAS1-domains of different PpsR protomers lead to a pronounced rotation of ~70 degrees of the PAS1 domain dimer along the alphaQ axis and explain the observed asymmetry of the complex. Details of the complex interface agree well with our HDX results (Fig. 6None). The pronounced stabilization in the (alpha3-beta3)N_Pregion can be explained by the observed contact with (alpha3-alpha4)H_A. Similarly, alphaQ interacts with alpha4H_Aand the linker region to the SCHIC domain including (alpha1 and beta2)S_A. In addition, (beta41-beta51)1_Pis sandwiched between the connecting loop of the 4HB to the SCHIC domain and (alpha1-beta2-alpha2)S_A. The interactions observed in the core complex fully explain the stabilization of all PpsR elements observed by HDX suggesting that the BLUF domain does not interact extensively with PpsR. Rather, we propose that AppA elements stabilized upon complex formation but not contacting PpsR, i.e. (alpha1-alpha2)H_Aand the BLUF capping helix, are stabilized internally. Interestingly, these elements are also in close proximity in the AppADeltaCcrystal structure. Combined with the observation that the arrangement of the 4HB and the SCHIC domain is almost identical in the isolated and complex structures (RMSD = 0.6 A), it is likely that the AppADeltaCstructure resembles that of AppA stabilized upon PpsR-binding. Figure 6Noneshows a combination of the complex structure with the PpsRDeltaHTHand AppADeltaCstructures. In this model the BLUF domain approaches the PAS2-HTH region of PpsR, which can explain the direct transmission of light-induced changes from the photoreceptor to the PAS2-HTH region as observed by HDX (Supplementary Fig. 7). In addition, the close positioning of the BLUF domain and the DNA-binding element are likely responsible for the light-induced destabilization of the ternary complex observed in EMSAs. The AppA-PpsR system serves as a master regulator ofR. sphaeroidesphotosynthesis genes in response to oxygen and light. Our studies on AppA, PpsR and their cognate DNA provide detailed functional and structural insights for both proteins and their complexes with implications for their biological function. The crystal structure of the transcriptional repressor PpsR reveals an intricate tetrameric assembly composed of two head-to-tail PpsR dimers. Both the N- and the PAS1-domains form homodimers between which alphaQ forms a coiled-coil like structure that serves as binding-site for either PAS2 domains of another PpsR dimer, leading to tetramer formation, or the AppA light-sensor, resulting in an AppA-PpsR2complexNone. The relevance of the PpsR tetramer is supported by the evolutionary conservation of the alpha32_Pand alphaQ interaction. However, the tetramer architecture cannot explain the highly cooperative DNA-binding mode observed for PpsR, because of the large distance between HTH-dimers. In addition, active site titration data support an octameric PpsR species for DNA-binding. Such an assembly is mediated by alphaQ of symmetry related tetramers and brings two HTH dimers in close proximity allowing them to cooperatively bind to target promoter sequences. The DNA-binding of PpsR octamers was also proposed for homologs fromBradyrhizobiumNone. The importance of these oligomeric states is further supported by the requirement of the N-domain for DNA-binding of PpsRin vivoNoneandin vitroNone. Based on the PpsR structure this can be rationalized by impaired dimer and tetramer formation of constructs lacking the N-domain, as suggested previouslyNone, consequently also affecting octamer formation. InR. sphaeroidesthe action of PpsR is modulated by the anti-repressor AppA. The two proteins form a complexin vitroandin vivoNone,None, enabling light- and oxygen-dependent regulation of gene expression. Previously, it was suggested that photon absorption by the AppA BLUF domain triggers dissociation of AppA-PpsR2None. This model is based on gel filtration data where AppA, PpsR and their complex are observed in comparable quantities, which indicates experimental conditions close to theKdof the complex. In this case, even subtle changes in affinity will lead to pronounced differences in the relative amounts of involved species. This interpretation is supported by the reduced, but not eliminated, fraction of complex upon illuminationNone. Analogous experiments using AppA concentrations above theKdof AppA-PpsR2resulted in no dissociation; moreover, native PAGE and HDX data also do not support substantial light-induced dissociation of the complex. Rather, our data indicate a small light-dependent decrease of AppA-PpsR2affinity. We identified a light-independent core binding interface, consisting of the 4HB and the SCHIC domain of AppA and the N-Q-PAS1 region of PpsR by combining structural and HDX data. Illumination rather influences the BLUF domain and capping helix of AppA and the HTH motif of PpsR which argues for a light-signaling pathway via allosteric structural changes. This hypothesis is supported by the fact that the AppA-PpsR2complex also binds to the PpsR-binding sites on DNA. This indicates structural "preorganization" of AppA and PpsR in their complex promoting ternary complex formation and thereby reflecting a form of configurational cooperativityNone. In contrast to the original binary description of PpsR-binding to DNA as a repressor, the introduction of a third component enables different properties of potential DNA-complexes (PpsR8-DNA vs. AppA-PpsR2-DNA) likely reducing the repressive strength and thereby promoting photosynthesis gene expression. Furthermore, light-modulation of AppA-PpsR2-DNA affinity in addition to the subtle light-induced dissociation of AppA-PpsR2potentially enhancesin vivocontrol. In particular, the concentration dependent competition of the ternary complex with DNA-binding of PpsR provides a fine-tunable control system, responding to illumination over a wider range of protein concentrations. Importantly, AppA and PpsR expression levels are inversely regulated in response to changing oxygen levelsNone. This results from the interplay between the PrrB-A and AppA-PpsR regulatory cascades where PrrA was shown to positively affect AppA expression upon transition from aerobic to anaerobic conditionsNone,None. These oxygen induced changes in concentration may be sufficient to explainin vivoregulation in response to changing light and oxygen levels by the ternary system. Since the cellular concentrations of AppA and PpsR are not known, we cannot exclude a regulatory mechanism based on complex dissociation at concentrations close to itsKdunderin vivoconditions. However, ternary complex formation occurs already at lower concentrations of PpsR and, therefore, increases the potential for transcriptional regulation as described above. In the new model, the light-dependent repressive effect of AppA under semi-aerobic conditionsNone,Noneis explained by the interference of BLUF elements with the HTH motif of PpsR. This reduces AppA-PpsR2affinity for DNA and enables excess PpsR to bind to promoter sequences (Fig. 7). This mechanism is consistent with observations under anaerobic conditions where light-induced repression was demonstrated for a strain lacking the PrrB activatorNone. Our study describes the first detailed structural characterization of a BLUF protein in complex with its non-covalent effector. We revealed molecular details of their interaction interface and also provided structural details of the linker region C-terminal of the BLUF domain and its importance for light-regulated modulation of DNA-binding. Our study contributes to a better understanding of the modularity and details of the signaling process of the BLUF photoreceptor family. Previously published crystal structures of the AppA BLUF domain show two different conformations of strand beta5 that result in either Trp104Noneor Met106Nonebeing positioned in the vicinity of the flavin chromophore, which might originate from the use of different protein constructsNone. These observations resulted in different mechanisms for the photoreaction and spurred a controversy over the dark state structure of AppA and other BLUF proteins (reviewed inNone). Our AppADeltaCstructure confirmed that the dark state conformation features Met106 close to the flavin cofactor and Trp104 in the "out" conformationNonewhere it contacts residues of the newly observed BLUF capping helix, which interacts with residues of beta5 and the BLUF core beta-sheet. HDX experiments showed that these structural elements are affected by illumination, which is in line with previous NMR experimentsNone,Noneand theoretical as well as spectroscopic studiesNone,Noneon the AppA BLUF domain. Combined with information from other BLUF proteins, common aspects of light-induced changes in the vicinity of the flavin cofactor are emerging that suggest the beta-sheet (especially beta5) and the C-terminal extensions of BLUFs to be important for signal transduction (reviewed inNone). Since HDX is not limited by the size of the system we also addressed the structural changes in AppA-PpsR2. This showed that complex formation is a prerequisite for structuring the C-terminal extension of BLUF, which experiences a pronounced destabilization upon illumination. This increased flexibility enables the BLUF domain to interfere with DNA-binding of the complex, which is in line within vivodata demonstrating restoration of light-signaling upon complementation of a system containing BLUF-less AppA with BLUF provided intransNone. The requirement of a preformed complex for light-signaling is of general interest not only for BLUF proteins but also for other photoreceptor families. So far, one system comprising a BLUF and an effector domain was characterized structurally and functionally; the light-regulated c-di-GMP phosphodiesterase BlrP1None. While some elements involved in transmitting the signal to the effector domain are conserved between BlrP1 and AppA, the arrangement of the C-terminal extensions of the BLUF domains differ substantially. BlrP1 represents a BLUF system that is covalently tethered to its effector, however, the majority of BLUF domains signal via non-covalent interactionNone. One such system, the BLUF protein PixD and its partner PixE involved in phototaxis control, has been subject of detailed molecular and physiological characterizationNone,None. Common aspects of light-signaling in the family have, so far, not been described and details of the non-covalent interactions are not known for the majority of BLUF proteins. However, knowledge of the complex interface appears to be critical for addressing structural changes and elucidating how the light-signal is transmitted to the effector. The structural characterization of AppA-PpsR2not only provides new information in this direction but also highlights an important caveat. Crystal structures obtained from isolated domains need to be interpreted with caution, since effector binding regions may be unstructured without interaction partner. Combining these results with other currently investigated BLUF systems will allow a separation of system-specific aspects of signal transduction from common features involved in BLUF-signaling, which will be important for enabling a rational design of artificial BLUF-based photosensors with application in the growing field of optogeneticsNone. We generated AppA constructs by PCR amplification from wild-type pET28_AppA (provided by P. Hegemann). For Ni-NTA based affinity purification, a C-terminal hexa-histidine-tag was included in reverse primers for AppA constructs. Primers for amplifying the full-length, Delta399 and 4HB-SCHIC domain AppA variants are described inSupplementary Table 1. The C20S mutation was introduced in pET21_AppA_full-length and pET28_AppA_Delta399; the Q63E mutation was generated in pET28_AppA_Delta399. In both cases, site-directed mutagenesis was performed according to the QuikChange method (primers inSupplementary Table 1) and correct clones were identified by DNA-sequencing. AnE. colicodon optimized gene (GeneArt) served as template for amplification of different PpsR constructs. We generated PCR products representing full-length PpsR, the DeltaHTH and the N-Q-PAS1 construct (primers inSupplementary Table 1). The PCR products were cloned into pET_M11 (provided by G. Stier) for using the TEV-cleavable N-terminal histidine-tag during purification. Protein expression was performed inE. coliBL21 (DE3). Cultures were induced with IPTG at an optical density of 0.6-0.9. All constructs except full-length AppA were expressed at 18 degrees C overnight in the presence of 0.2 or 0.5 mM IPTG for AppA or PpsR, respectively. Full-length AppA was expressed at 24 degrees C for 6 hours with 0.2 mM IPTG. All AppA experiments from the point of induction onwards were carried out under safe-light conditions, if not stated otherwise. Cells were harvested by centrifugation and the pellets resuspended in buffer A (20 mM CHES pH 9, 10 mM imidazole, 300 mM NaCl and 5 % (weight per volume (w/v)) glycerol) including EDTA-free protease inhibitor (Roche). We performed cell lysis using a microfluidizer (Microfluidics) and clarified lysates by ultracentrifugation at 180,000 g prior to Ni-NTA chromatography. The column was washed with buffer A containing 50 mM imidazole and the protein eluted in buffer A with 200 mM imidazole. AppA fractions incubated with excess FMN were concentrated using Amicon centrifugal filter units and loaded onto a Superdex 200 10/300 GL column equilibrated in buffer B (10 mM CHES pH 9, 150 mM NaCl, 5 % (w/v) glycerol). After elution from the Ni-NTA column PpsR constructs were dialyzed over night against buffer C (10 mM CHES pH 9, 100 mM NaCl, 2 mM DTE, 2 mM EDTA, 5 % (w/v) glycerol) with parallel TEV-cleavage using a ratio of ~1:25 for TEV:substrate. To remove histidine-tagged TEV and the cleaved histidine-tag, the dialyzed sample was reloaded onto the Ni-NTA column and the flow-through used for further purification. Full-length PpsR was loaded onto a HiTrap Heparin column (GE Healthcare) and eluted with a NaCl gradient in the buffer system used for dialysis. All proteins were finally purified by size exclusion chromatography in analogy to AppA. Selenomethionine-substituted proteins were expressed inE. coliBL21 (DE3) with modified growth media according toNoneand purified as described above. 25 muM AppA and PpsR were pre-incubated at 4 degrees C for 30 minutes and subjected to size exclusion chromatography at RT using a Superdex 200 10/300 GL column (GE Healthcare) equilibrated in buffer B. The chromatography system was connected to an 18-angle light scattering detector (Dawn Heleos, Wyatt Technology) combined with a refractive index detector (Waters). We analyzed data with the ASTRA software (Wyatt Technology), providing estimates for the molar mass of eluting species. We prepared DNA probes based on PCR amplification of theR. sphaeroides pucpromoter region. We used two probes:puc I(70 bp) encompassing the two palindromes required for PpsR-binding with a 14 and 13 bp extension of the operator sequence at the 5' and 3' end, respectively, andpuc II(250 bp) including 112 bp and 95 bp of the operator sequence, accordingly. DNA probes were purified on Superose 6 (GE Healthcare) size exclusion columns equilibrated in 150 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer. Buffer exchange to buffer B was performed by sequential steps of ultrafiltration in spin columns (Amicon Ultra-4, 10 kDa cut-off, Millipore). 20 nM DNA probes were incubated in buffer D (10 mM CHES pH 9, 150 mM NaCl, 15 % (w/v) glycerol) with varying amounts of purified PpsR and AppA in a total volume of 5 muL containing 0.5 mug heparin. The mixtures were incubated for 10 min at RT and then separated on 10 %Tris-glycine-EDTA pH 9.0 (TGE) gels forpuc Ior 6 % TGE gels forpuc IIcontaining samples (allowing resolution of different mass and pI ranges for protein and DNA samples) with 50 mM Tris, 380 mM glycine and 1 mM EDTA at pH 9 as running buffer. Gel runs were performed at 4 degrees C (except where noted otherwise) under either safe-light conditions or with blue-light illumination from a royal-blue (455 nm) collimated LED lamp (Thorlabs). For the latter purpose, samples were pre-irradiated for 2 min at 600 muW cm-2blue-light in the slot and during electrophoresis (10 V cm-1for 160 min) constant illumination of the gel was kept at 30 muW cm-2. Gels were stained with GelRed (Biotium) for DNA-visualization followed by protein staining using InstantBlue (Biozol). For the active site titration we titrated PpsR (2.5 muM) with 100 to 700 nMpuc II. The gel run was performed at RT for 70 minutes at 10 V cm-1. Crystallization was performed at 20 degrees C. Trigonal crystals of AppA Delta399 wild-type and C20S were grown in hanging-drop geometry using 15 mg mL-1protein and 0.3 M Tris-Cl pH 7.4, 1.3 M NaCl and 0.3 M MgCl2as reservoir. Growth of selenomethionine labeled AppADeltaCincluded 50 mM DTE in the reservoir. Crystals were harvested after a 2 hour soak in reservoir solution saturated with NaCl and cryo-cooled in liquid nitrogen. Trigonal PpsR DeltaHTH crystals were grown in hanging-drop vapor-diffusion setups with 0.1 M Tris-Cl pH 8.5, 1 M ammonium sulfate, 12 % (w/v) glycerol, 6 % (w/v) xylitol and 1 % dioxane as reservoir and protein at 30 mg mL-1. Crystals were harvested after 2 weeks and cryo-cooled after cryoprotection in 50 mM Na-Pibuffer pH 6.8, 12 % (w/v) glycerol and 3 M Na-malonate. Selenomethionine labeled protein was crystallized accordingly. The complex of PpsR N-Q-PAS1 and the AppA 4HB-SCHIC was crystallized in sitting-drop vapor-diffusion geometry. 0.1 M HEPES pH 7, 64 mM tri-sodium citrate, 10 % (w/v) PEG 5000 monomethyl ether was mixed with the preformed complex at a concentration of 8.3 mg mL-1(1.5:2 stoichiometry of AppA:PpsR). For cryoprotection reservoir solution containing 20 % glycerol was added to the drop. After 1 min incubation crystals were harvested and cryo-cooled in liquid nitrogen. Diffraction data were acquired at 100 K at beamline X10SA at the SLS (PSI, Villingen, Switzerland). Data were processed using XDSNone. Phasing and refinement was performed with PHENIXNone. Refinement included an initial simulated annealing (torsion) step followed by several rounds of maximum likelihood least squares refinement of models modified with CootNoneemploying sigmaA-weighted 2mFo-DFcandFo-Fcelectron density maps. Details of the refinement procedures are presented in theSupplementary Note. Data collection, processing and refinement statistics are summarized inTable 1. We incubated separately purified AppADeltaCand PpsR at 4 degrees C for 30 min using a 1.1 fold excess of AppA based on the AppA-PpsR2stoichiometry. Purification of AppADeltaC-PpsR2was performed on a Superdex 200 10/300 GL column and the pooled complex fractions were concentrated to 200 muM AppADeltaC-PpsR2. We prepared AppADeltaCin analogy at a concentration of 200 muM and PpsR samples were set up at a final concentration of 400 muM. We performed deuterium labeling in triplicate after a 90 s pre-incubation at 20 degrees C followed by 20-fold dilution in D2O with 10 mM CHES, 150 mM NaCl, 5 % glycer(ol-d3), pD 9.5. For complex measurements this resulted in approximately 75 % of AppADeltaCbound to PpsR in equilibrium. For blue-light measurements we included parallel illumination from a royal-blue (455 nm) collimated LED lamp (Thorlabs) for the pre-incubation step and during labeling providing a light intensity of 600 muW cm-2at 450 nm. Aliquots of 20 pmol (complex and AppADeltaC) or 40 pmol for PpsR were removed after 15 s, 1, 5 and 20 min and quenched in ice cold 200 mM ammonium formic acid pH 2.6 buffer. We then injected the samples into a cooled HPLC setup (0.5 degrees C). Deuterated samples were digested on a pepsin column (Applied Biosystems) at 10 degrees C. Resulting peptides were desalted on a 2 cm C18 guard-column (Discovery Bio C18, Supelco) and separated in the presence of 0.6 % formic acid with a 20 min acetonitrile gradient (15 to 50 %) on a reversed phase column (Discovery Bio Wide Pore C18 10 * 0.1 cm - 3 mum) and injected into a maXis ESI-UHR-TOF (Bruker) for measuring deuterium incorporation. For details of data evaluation seeSupplementary Note.