Engineer anEscherichia colirecipient cell (Prey,P) by transforming (using standard CaCl2treatment or electroporation)15E. coliDH5alpha cells with a plasmid allowing the a-complementation of thelacZgene (Table 1). Plate the transformed cells on Luria-Bertani agar plates (LBA, 1.5% agar) containing 5-bromo-4-chloro-indolyl-beta-D-galactopyranoside (X-gal) at 40 mg/ml final concentration and appropriate antibiotic. Incubate at 37 degrees C overnight and the following morning select for blue transformants (see S1.3). Grow thePseudomonas aeruginosa donor cells that are T6SS-active (DNone) or T6SS-inactive (D-) (Table 1) on LBA overnight at 37 degrees C. In the example presented here we used aP. aeruginosa retSstrain possessing a constitutively active H1-T6SS16and an isogenic mutant with a deletion of the H1-T6SS gene cluster (Table 1). The next day, prepare an overnight liquid culture in aerated flask by inoculating a bright blue clone among theE. colitransformants (P) from the plate described in S1.1, in 5 ml of tryptic soy broth (TSB) supplemented with the appropriate antibiotic. Grow under agitation at 37 degrees C. Proceed equally with a single colony of (DNone) and of (DNone) from the plate described in S1.2. Prepare LBA plates for the next day experiment. Make sure these plates are properly dried (either near the Bunsen burner or in laminar flow cabinet). Prepare an "Assay-input" (A-Input) plate for the strains (DNone), (DNone), and (P). Prepare an "Assay-output" (A-output) plate for the strains (DNone+P) and (DNone+P). Divide and label the plates accordingly. After overnight growth (see S1.3), measure the optical density (OD600nm) of the input bacterial culture (DNone,DNoneandP) and calculate the volume required to obtain a cell density equivalent to 1 unit OD600nmof each strain. Each "input" cell culture (DNone, DNoneandP) is initially collected in a sterile 1.5 ml Eppendorf tubes. Centrifuge the bacterial samples at 13,000 rpm during 1 min at room temperature and discard the supernatant. Resuspend the pellets of theDNone, DNone, andPcultures, in 100 mul of fresh TSB by gentle pipetting and inoculate 10 ml of each corresponding strain as a single spot on the "A-input" plate (prepared in S2.1). Inoculate the "A-output" plate (prepared in S2.1). More precisely, mix gently 30 mul of (DNone) with 30 mul (P) and 30 mul of (DNone) with 30 ml (P) in two separate Eppendorf tubes (Notethat the cultures used are those described in S2.4). Inoculate 20 mul of the mixes (DNone/P) and (DNone/P) as individual spots on the "A-output" plate. Allow the spots to dry nearby a Bunsen burner and place the plate in an incubator at 37 degrees C for an appropriate period of time during which the bacterial killing is taking place. In the case ofP. aeruginosa, an efficient bacterial killing is observed after 5 hr incubation when comparing a T6SS active with a T6SS defective strain. Prepare LBA plates containing 40 mug/ml X-gal for the readout of the assay. The plates will be called "Readout input" or "R-input" to spot isolated bacteria or "Readout output" or "R-output" to spot mixed bacterial cultures and thus read the killing performance. These plates need also to be properly dried. Divide the plate in four equal parts on its back and annotate these parts 0, 10-1, 10-2and 10-3, designating the dilutions of bacterial culture to spot on the agar plates (see S3.3). The dilution will allow a semi-quantitative evaluation of the blue/white bacteria ratio within the same spot. Collect with a sterile loop the individual bacterial spots from the "A-input" plate (see S2.4) and "A-output" plate (see S2.5) and resuspend each spot in distinct 1.5 ml Eppendorf tubes containing 1 ml of TSB. Place in an Eppendorf shaker block during 30 min to resuspend efficiently the bacteria. Prepare a series of 5 times 3 Eppendorf tubes containing 900 mul of TSB and proceed for each resuspended spot to ten fold serial dilutions up to 10-3. Make sure to change pipette tips and to vortex 5 seconds between each dilution step. Proceed to the spotting of your bacterial dilutions prepared in S3.3 on well-dried LBA plates containing 40 mug/ml X-gal by starting with the most diluted to the undiluted suspension, making these the "R-input" plates for the "A-input" spots and the "R-output" plates for the "A-output" spots (Figure 2). Vortex briefly each tube before proceeding to the spotting to keep a homogenous bacterial suspension. For reproducibility of the results, spot 20 mul in triplicate within a quadrant (Figure 2). The relative dryness of your plate is important at this stage since the spots need to remain individually separated on the plate and not glide towards each other. A quantification of the competition assay is also possible at this stage of the experiment. Following the step 3.3, spread 100 mul of the dilution 10-3on LBA plates containing 40 mug/ml X-gal. For reproducibility of the results, proceed to a plating in triplicate for each spot from the "A-output" plate. Place the dilution plates in a 37 degrees C incubator overnight (corresponding to 16 hr incubation). Proceed to the counting of the blue colonies (thePcells that remained alive). Typical results obtained after 5 hr of competition are shown inFigure 3. Leave the plate open (no lid) within a sterile zone to allow the absorption of the liquid in excess within each spot. Place the plate in a 37 degrees C incubator overnight. During this incubation time, the killing is still occurring in the mix (DNone/P) since both strains are still in contact. Take a picture or scan your plates for the output analysis (Figure 2). Where spots remain largely blue it indicates thatE. colihas not been killed byP. aeruginosa. That is the case whenE. coliis mixed with a T6SS-defectiveP. aeruginosastrain (D-) (Figure 2, plate at the bottom right). Typical results are shown inFigure 1with the strains and reagents described inTable 1. The plates shown in this figure were scanned after an overnight incubation. The "Readout-Input" plates show a serial dilution pattern for the strains used in this assay. As expected, theE. coliprey spots (P) overexpressing thelacZgene appear blue on media supplemented with X-gal, while the donorP. aeruginosastrains (DNone,T6SS activeNone) and (DNone,T6SS inactiveNone) remain white. The "Readout-output" plates on which the mix between the prey and a T6SS active strain (DNone/P) has been spotted show the disappearance of the blue prey thus indicating it has been killed. This demonstrates the ability of the donor to outcompete the prey. The persistence of the blue color on the (DNone/P) plate demonstrates the inability of an inactive T6SS donor to kill the blue prey. NoneFigure 1. Killing ofNoneby T6SS-proficientNoneP. aeruginosainjects toxins into theE. coli target cell in a T6SS-dependent manner (shown by the white arrow). Two toxins Tse1 and Tse3 (orange and red circles) are injected into theE. coli periplasm and degrade the peptidoglycan9. The Tse2 toxin (yellow circle) is injected into theE. coli cytoplasm and has a bacteriostatic activity8,10. The combined action of the toxins kills the target cells (flash of lightning and skull). The survival of target cells can be detected by monitoring the activity of the produced beta-galactosidase (see alsoFigure 2). P. aeruginosa is protected against the activity of the toxins by the immunity proteins Tsi1, Tsi2 and Tsi3 (orange, yellow and red squares, respectively)8,9,10. NoneFigure 2. Agar plate assay to monitor T6SS-dependent bacterial killing. In this figure are shown on the upper part the "Readout-Input" plates consisting of the serial dilutions of theDNone, DNone, andPinput cells. TheP input cells are blue due to the alpha-complementation of thelacZgene and thus produced beta-galactosidase that cleaves X-gal. In the lower part is shown the "Readout-Output" plates consisting of serial dilutions of the bacterial mix between an active (DNone/P),or an inactive (DNone/P), T6SS donorP. aeruginosastrain with theE. coliprey. Click here to view larger figure. NoneFigure 3. Quantification of the killing ofNonebyNoneafter 5 hr incubation. The graph presents the CFU counting ofE. colidescribed in the 3.4 step. The results presented here show a 3-fold difference between the T6SS+ and the T6SS- strains, suggesting that most of the killing is taking place during the 5 initial hours of contact. The method presented in this article allows a visual observation of T6SS-mediated bactericidal/bacteriostasis activity. The assay is performed on the surface of an agar plate. It has been previously shown that T6SS-dependent killing assay performed with mixed bacterial liquid culture is not efficient, likely because of the lack of steady contact between the two bacteria8. The T6SS is believed to operate with a mechanism akin to the one used by bacteriophages to inject DNA into target cells17. In liquid culture, the tube-like structure of the T6SS may break more easily, inter-bacterial contact can be lost, and the toxins are not efficiently delivered. In terms of incubation times, the 5 initial hours of contact that we describe between the donor strain and the prey are sufficient to observe bacterial killing betweenP. aeruginosaandE. coli, as illustrated inFigure 3. Nevertheless, it is advisable to adjust the incubation time by performing a kinetic in order to optimize the experimental conditions. Since this method is a color based technique, the output results can be compromised by the pigmentation of the donor strain. For instance, in the case ofP. aeruginosa, some strains produce high levels of colored pigments such as pyocyanin and pyoverdine, which can interfere with the assay readout, making the distinction from the prey relatively difficult. Other chromogenic beta-galactosidase substrates, such as the magenta-gal or the red-gal, can be used instead of the X-gal (Table 1). The competition assay can make use of other reporter genes for the readout. For instance, similar assay has also been performed by using green fluorescent protein-labeled preys12. Our assay, while not quantitative, gives a good indication of the T6SS activity since it is based on the survival or the killing of a reporter prey. This technique presents the advantage of being easy and convenient to evaluate the bactericidal/bacteriostasis activity of T6SSs from any bacterial species. So far, the activity of the T6SS has been shown against Gram-negative bacteria and no clear example of T6SS-sensitive Gram-positive bacteria has been reported yet12. It is also obvious that incompatibility in the culture of the different bacterial species to test (e.g. growth temperature, oxygenation, specific media) is to be considered. Our assay can also be used to evaluate which of the T6SS components are absolutely essential since even traces of a secreted toxin might be sufficient to kill the prey. Even weak activity of the T6SS could then clearly be detected by our assay as compared to standard procedure testing T6SS-dependent secretion using culture supernatant and western blot analysis. However, a proper colony-forming unit (CFU) counting is still required for accurate quantification of this T6SS activity. We have nothing to disclose.