Given the central role of fluorescent small molecules in many modern biological techniques, it is surprising their preparation still often relies on inefficient condensation reactions requiring harsh reaction conditions with poor substrate scope. None,NoneNew synthetic methodologies are needed to enable the identification of optimal agents. This is particularly true for near-IR fluorophores, which find increasing use for a variety of techniques, including in clinical settings, due to the low autofluorescence and high tissue penetration of light in this range. NoneHeptamethine cyanines represent a privileged scaffold, and various derivatives are the small molecule bioimaging agents of choice with emission maxima approaching 800 nm. None-NoneCurrent state-of-the-art compounds are often substituted at the C4' position with phenols (Figure1A). None-NoneThese widely used molecules suffer from significant liabilities including poor chemical stability, likely arising from nucleophilic exchange reactions at the C4' position. None-NoneCyanines modified at the C4' position with anO-alkyl substituent are desirable because these are likely to be quite stable, while maintaining the excellent optical and physical properties associated with C4'-O-substitution. However, such molecules have only rarely been describedNoneand are unknown when functionalized for biomolecule conjugation. General considerations. Here we report a general approach to access C4'-O-alkyl heptamethine cyanines through a new variant of the classical Smiles rearrangement. Traditionally, Smiles rearrangements employ a combination of strong bases and elevated temperatures to induce the alpha,delta-transposition of heteroatoms in reactions driven by formation of the thermodynamically preferred isomer (Figure1B). None,NoneA distinct alternative selectively incorporates an electrophile on the heteroatom originally affixed to the unsaturated carbon providing otherwise inaccessible products. Here we provide the first examples of this concept, a Smiles rearrangement with concurrent electrophile incorporation, to gain access to promising C4'-O-alkyl heptamethine cyanines (2) from easily synthesized C4'-N-methylethanolamine-substituted precursors (1). This method avoids the shortcomings of the more orthodox preparative approach for these compounds, intermolecular C4'-chloride substitution by direct addition of an alkoxide. Such chloride substitution reactions, which proceed rapidly in excellent yield with amine, phenol, and thiol nucleophiles, generally fail in this case due to the poor kinetics of alkoxides in electron transfer SRN1 pathways, the putative substitution mechanism. NoneIn one report, competitive addition of alkoxides to the imine-like C2 position has been suggested to intercede. NoneIn our own initial studies, which are consistent with these previous findings, we found that5was not observed when3and4were combined under a variety of basic conditions (eq1). NoneNoneUsing the Smiles rearrangement approach, we describe the synthesis of a diverse array of C4'-O-alkyl cyanines and detail several mechanistic experiments. The resulting fluorophores exhibit optical properties ideal for near-IR imaging and excellent chemical stability to thiol nucleophiles. Critically, access to C4'-O-alkyl substitution will provide an opportunity to develop agents with improved properties relative to those prepared through existing strategies. None,None,NoneToward these goals, we show that an antibody conjugate is suitable for both fluorescence microscopy and fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS). As shown in Table1, the rearrangement process proceeds readily with a variety of substrates. TheN-methylethanolamine-substituted6and7precursors were synthesized from known C4'-chloro intermediates as described previously. None,NoneCharacteristic of C4'-N-substitution,6and7exhibit a broad hypsochromic (blue-shifted) absorption, with maxima at 687 and 644 nm, respectively. None,NoneWith these two substrates in hand, we investigated a number of electrophiles and conditions to characterize the rearrangement process. Representative of productive rearrangement is the use of chloroformates to convert6to carbamates8and9. These reactions undergo a dramatic blue to green color transition. Indicative of C4'-O-substitution,8exhibits an 76 nm bathochromic shift relative toN-linked6, a small Stokes shift, and a high molar extinction coefficient. None2-D NMR experiments were also employed to provide an unambiguous assignment. Similarly, we found that6reacted with cyclic anhydrides and activated carboxylic acids to provide amide products10and11in 71% and 72% yield, respectively. Methyl iodide also promotesN- toO- transposition to afford ammonium12in 70% yield. Demonstrating that the rearrangement is tolerant of sulfonate-bearing cyanines, tetrasulfonylated7is converted to carboxylate13in 63% yield with glutaric anhydride. Tetrasulfonate7also undergoes HATU coupling to produce maleimide and protected amino acid variants14and15in yields of 62% and 73% yield, respectively. In these examples, preactivation of the carboxylic acid with HATU, DIPEA was critical for efficient rearrangement. Notably,13and14bear suitable chemical handles for bioconjugation, and the four sulfonate groups impart excellent aqueous solubility and a reduced tendency toward aggregation-desirable traits for biological imaging. We sought to provide initial insight regarding the various mechanistic possibilities. Divergent reaction pathways were observed between several methylation and acylation conditions (Table2). While methyl iodide yields the rearrangement product,12, trimethyloxonium tetrafluoroborate affords methyl ether16. Similarly, unlike the peptide coupling conditions of entry 4 in Table1, a combination of acetyl chloride and 2,6-lutidine provided only theO-acetylation product17in high yield. The latter result indicates thatO-acylated compounds are unlikely to be reaction intermediates en route toN-acylated products (e.g.,11). We also have compared the rearrangement kinetics ofN-methylethanolamine substituted6, and the one-carbonN-methylpropanolamine homologue,18(Figure2). Derivative6and18were exposed to identical conditions (4 equiv of EDCI, 4 equiv of AcOH, 1 equiv of DIPEA), and the reaction progress was monitored by HPLC. While6reacts relatively rapidly (t1/2= 37 min) to form11,18proceeds much more slowly to19(t1/2= 720 min), though ultimately in good conversion and with satisfying isolated yield (72%). One reasonable mechanistic scenario involves initial nitrogen quaternerization and facile intramolecular displacement. This mechanism rationalizes the kinetic dependence on ring size (5 faster than 6) by suggesting that acyl-ammonium formation, which is likely reversible,Noneprecedes rate determining and, presumably, irreversible tetrahedral intermediate formation. An alternative mechanism consisting ofN-selective electrophilic trapping of a minor equilibrating C4'-O-substituted component of6or7is also conceivable. However, the lack of a ?780 nm peak or peak shoulder in the absorption spectra under relevant reaction conditions suggests thatO-linked species are, at most, negligible components of6or7. Nevertheless, further studies are required. Relative rearrangement kinetics of6and18. We also examined the reversibility of the rearrangement (Scheme1). When Fmoc-protected9was exposed to piperidine in DMF, the C4'-N-methylethanolamine-substituted product6, its synthetic precursor, was rapidly generated. This process likely occurs through the intermediacy ofO-linked species20and further illustrates the thermodynamic preference for C4'-N-substitution in preference toO-substitution. It is noted that the facile conversion of9to6alters the absorption maximum by almost 100 nm, suggesting potential for various optical sensing applications. With access to a range of C4'-O-alkyl heptamethine cyanines, we explored their suitability for imaging purposes. Representative compounds8and13possess similar absorption properties and improved quantum yields relative to a standard heptamethine cyanine, indocyanine green (ICG) (Table3). Previous studies have shown that widely used C4' phenol- and thiol-substituted heptamethine cyanines can be rapidly exchanged by thiol nucleophiles under aqueous conditions, with problematic consequences during conjugation reactions of cysteine-containing peptides and macromolecules and during DNA sequencing applications. None,NoneIn addition, phenol-to-thiol exchange has been recently observed intracellularly in the context of a thiol-sensing platform. NoneThe thiol reactivity of13was compared with phenol-substituted21and toS-mercaptoethanol-substituted22. Solutions of13,21, and22(10 muM in pH 7.4 PBS buffer with no intentional O2exclusion) were exposed to 1 mM glutathione, and the reaction course was monitored by HPLC (Figure3A). With21and22, rapid conversion to the glutathione adduct23was observed (t1/2= 95 and 40 min, respectively). By contrast, alkyl-ether13showed no decomposition over the same time period and greater than 90% was present after 3 days. These experiments clearly demonstrate the superior chemical stability of these new alkyl-ether variants over conventional C4' phenol- or thiol-substituted heptamethine cyanines. We also measured the near-IR fluorescence signal under identical conditions. As shown in Figure3B, the C4'-O-linked compounds,13and21, initially exhibit significantly greater signal than C4'-S-linked22. Whereas13maintains the initial value, fluorescence from the mixture of21and forming23diminishes and approaches that of the mixture of22and23. Thus, the loss of C4'-O-linkage is detrimental to the emissive properties of these molecules. Measured in methanol relative to ICG. Stability of21,22, and13in the presence of 1 mM glutathione (GSH) in pH 7.4 PBS. (A) HPLC conversion of starting material (10 muM). These data were used to obtain the indicated half-lives. (B) Fluorescent signal over time (2 muM, lambdaex= 740 nm, lambdaem= 790 nm). We have examined the use of these molecules as antibody labels (Figure4). NoneCarboxylate13was converted to its NHS-ester (TSTU, DMF, 35 degrees C) and then incubated with the anti-HER1 antibody, panitumumab, to provide the labeled antibody with a degree of labeling (DOL) of 2.1-2.2. The conjugate was incubated with HER1+ (MDA-MB-468) and HER1- (MCF-7) cells. Characteristic antibody labeling was only observed in HER1+ cells by fluorescence microscopy using a standard Cy7 filter set (lambdaex= 710 nm, lambdaem= 775 nm, Figure4B). The efficient cellular labeling of the fluorophore-antibody conjugate was also confirmed using FACS (Figure4C). These results suggest that13and other fluorophores that emerge from this new approach are likely to be suitable for a range of near-IR fluorescence applications. (A) NHS-ester formation and labeling of13. (B) Fluorescence microscopy images of live MDA-MB-468 and MCF-7 cells treated with 100 nM labeled panitumumab and Hoechst 33342 (1 muM). (C) Flow cytometry of MDA-MB-468 and MCF-7 cells treated with 100 nM labeled panitumumab. In conclusion, we have developed a synthetic approach to previously inaccessible C4'-O-alkyl heptamethine cyanines. This sequence provides concise and efficient access to a new class of useful heptamethine cyanine fluorophores resistant to thiol exchange reactions. As compared to conventional Smiles rearrangements, the alternative mode described here benefits from both lowering the barrier to productive reactivity and the additional structural complexity in the product acquired through electrophile incorporation. Current efforts are focused on extension of this Smiles rearrangement manifold and on further applications of molecules resulting from this approach.