The genetic code normally requires Watson-Crick base pairing at the first two positions of the codon-anticodon helix, and tolerates certain specific mismatches at the third (wobble) position. The structural basis for this was apparent when three universally conserved bases in the A site of the small (30S) ribosomal subunit were shown to change conformation to monitor Watson-Crick geometry at the first two base pairs in the minor groove of the codon-anticodon helix, while leaving the wobble position relatively unconstrainedNone. These interactions result in additional binding energy that is used to induce global conformational changes that facilitate the hydrolysis of GTP by EF-TuNone-None, as was predicted by earlier kinetic dataNone. However, recently it was shown that modification of the uridine in stop codons with pseudouridine (Psi;Fig. 1a) allowed PsiAA and PsiAG to code for serine or threonine and PsiGA for phenylalanine or tyrosineNone. To understand how the normally forbidden base pairs in such recoding can be accepted by the ribosome, we have determined crystal structures of the anticodon stem loops (ASLs) of tRNASerand tRNAPhebound to the modified stop codons PsiAG and PsiGA, respectively, in the A site of the 30S subunit, as well as the crystal structure of the most common bacterial tRNASerbound to PsiAG in the entire 70S ribosome. We first showed that nonsense suppression by pseudouridine also occurs in bacteria. We constructed three synthetic mRNAs encoding a 6X-histidine tag at the N-terminus and a FLAG tag at the C-terminus (Fig. 1b, top). The three mRNAs contain either an amber stop (UAG), a glutamine sense (CAG). or a pseudouridylated amber (PsiAG) codon inserted just before the FLAG tag. Afterin vitrotranslation, anti-6X-histidine immunoblotting revealed that the three constructs are translated at the same level (Fig.1b, bottom left). The anti-Flag immunoblot had a signal comparable to background when the normal UAG amber codon was present, showing that normal termination occurred and the downstream Flag sequence was not translated (Fig. 1b, bottom right). However, the presence of the PsiAG amber codon increased the signal from the Flag tag to a level comparable to that of the CAG sense codon, showing that the substitution of U by Psi results in a strong read-through of the amber stop codon in bacteria, as previously reported in eukaryotesNone. Given the conservation of the decoding center, it is likely that the recoding also specifies the same amino acids as previously established in eukaryotes. Since recoding and the decoding center are both conserved across the two kingdoms, we determined the structure of the ASL for the yeast tRNASer, which has an IGA anticodon (http://gtrnadb.ucsc.edu/Sacc_cere/) (Fig. 1c) bound to a modified PsiAG stop codon in the 30S subunit as done previously for cognate tRNANone(Supplementary MethodsandTable S1). Clear difference Fourier density was seen for both the codon and the ASL (Fig. 2a), allowing an unambiguous determination of the conformation of the bases involved (Fig. 2b). The overall conformations of the PsiAG codon and ASL in the A site are very similar to those observed previously for phenylalanine codon-ASL pairs in both the 30S subunitNone,Noneand the intact 70S ribosomeNone. However the details of each of the codon-anticodon base pairs are strikingly different, and reveal how the ribosome facilitates the decoding of a normally non-cognate tRNA. At the first position, the Psi1 of the codon and A36 of the tRNA form the expected Watson-Crick base pair (Fig. 2b, left, andFig. 3a). The N1 of Psi is exposed to solvent and does not form an additional interaction with either the ASL or the ribosome. The minor groove of this base pair is recognized by A1493 of the decoding centre (Fig. 3a). However, unlike the case of normal decoding (Fig. 3d), the electron density for A1493 is consistent with asynrather than ananticonformation (Fig. S1). In the second position, the A2 of the codon adopts asynconformation that forms two hydrogen bonds via its Hoogsteen edgeNonewith the Watson-Crick edge of G35 of the ASL (Fig. 2b, center andFig. 3b). Interestingly, the C1'-C1' distance of 10.9 A in this non-canonical base pair is not much larger than the distance of 10.5 A found in a canonical pyrimidine-purine base pair with Watson-Crick geometryNone. Presumably this difference is small enough to allow the base pair to be accommodated in the decoding centre of the ribosome. Surprisingly, despite the completely different type of base pair, the conformation and interactions of the ribosomal bases A1492 and G530 are very similar to that seen in normal decoding (Fig. 3b and e). Yeast tRNASerhas an inosine in the third (wobble) position of the anticodonNone. In suppression of a PsiAG codon, the inosine would have to make a previously unknown I-G base pair, which would bring the two normally repulsive O6 groups close together. Similar to the second position, this unusual base pair is formed by asynconformation of G3 making a single hydrogen bond via its Hoogsteen face with the Watson-Crick edge of I34 of the ASL (Fig. 2b, right andFig. 3c). The potential electrostatic repulsion between the O6 atoms on G3 and I34 is overcome by coordination of both atoms with what is likely a magnesium ion, thus stabilizing the base pair. To determine the generality of these interactions, we determined two additional structures. The first was that of bacterial tRNASerwith a CGA anticodon, bound to mRNA in the entire 70S ribosome. Here, only the second base pair involves a purine-purine mismatch, which adopts the same Hoogsteen/Watson-Crick geometry as seen in the 30S (Table S1,Fig. S2a and c). We also determined the structure of the 30S subunit with a PsiGA codon with ASL for tRNAPhecontaining a GAA anticodon (Table S1,Fig. S2b), since it was shown that PsiGA could be decoded by phenylalanineNone. The same type of base pairing is seen, including thesynconformation of A1493 at the first position and the Hoogsteen/Watson-Crick interactions at the second and third positions. Since the third position here involves a GA pair instead of an IG, there are two hydrogen bonds and there is no coordinating magnesium ion. These structures show that the unusual Hoogsteen/Watson-Crick base pairs for purine-purine mismatches are seen for both bacterial and eukaryotic tRNAs implicated in recoding of stop codons, and in the context of both 30S subunits and the 70S ribosome. The structure of tRNASerASL with the unmodified UAG codon in the 30S subunit (data not shown; PDB code: 4K0K) was identical within coordinate error to that with the PsiAG codon. This suggests that any difference in the decoding properties must come from differences in the stability of the final complex due to pseudouridine, rather than differences in structure. This work shows how the normally forbidden codon-anticodon pairs that would be involved in recoding by pseudouridine-containing stop codons are accommodated in the ribosomal decoding center. At the first codon position, thesynconformation of A1493 facilitates an alternate and possibly tighter interaction with the minor groove of the Watson-Crick PsiA pair (Fig. 2b, left, andFig. 3a). The Watson-Crick/Hoogsteen base pairs at the second and third positions seen here have also been observed in canonical duplex DNANone, showing that the energetic difference between canonical and Hoogsteen pairs is small enough for the latter to be observed as a transient feature. However, during decoding, the ribosomal bases A1492 and G530 were suggested to specifically recognize Watson-Crick pairing geometry at the second position (Fig. 3e)None. Nevertheless, the same interactions can be formed with the Watson-Crick/Hoogsteen base pair here (Fig. 3b), presumably because its width is similar and the interactions are with the 2' OH groups of the riboses of the codon-anticodon base pair rather than with the bases themselves. It is likely that these interactions are not as favorable as for a canonical Watson-Crick base pair. However, suppression of stop codons by tRNAs requires only that they are able to out-compete release factors; they do not have to be as efficient as cognate tRNAs on sense codons. It is not apparent why the pseudouridine modification should facilitate binding of a non-cognate tRNA. The additional hydrogen bond donor N1 of Psi, which is not present in U (Fig. 1a), is exposed to solvent and does not make additional interactions with the ribosome or ligands. Pseudouridine in RNA has been shown to result in an increased stabilization of helices without noticeable changes in structureNone,None. Understanding how pseudouridine results in increased stabilization of helices will require both high-resolution data on model systems as well as computational and biochemical studies. Determining the effect of pseudouridine on the rate constants of various steps in decodingNone, or on efficiency of termination, will also help to clarify its role. In principle, modification of sense codons could also lead to alternate forms of recognition. In this context it is interesting that a pseudouridine in the anticodon of a tRNA leads to altered coding of a sense codonNone. Finally, the work shows that the decoding center of the ribosome has a previously unsuspected plasticity that under certain circumstances allows alternative non-canonical base pairing, thereby allowing an expansion of the genetic code. Reporter mRNAs were synthesized essentially as described previouslyNone. Briefly, we generated a DNA template using overlap extension PCR. The template thus generated contained a T7 promoter, followed sequentially by a Shine-Dalgarno (SD) sequence, a His6 tag, a termination codon (TAG), and a Flag tag (seeFig 1), with the sequence:None5'-GGG AGA GGA GGC AAC GAC ATG GCC GCC CAC CAC CAC CAC CAC CAC GCC GGC GCC GAA CAG AAG GAA GAA GAC CGC GAG (T/C/Psi AG GAC TAC AAG GAC GAC GAC GAC AAG GCC TAG-3'In vitro transcription with T7 RNA polymerase was used to generate the reporter mRNA transcript containing an authentic termination codon (UAG) immediately upstream of the Flag tag. Using the same strategy, we also generated a control mRNA transcript, where a CAG sense codon replaced the UAG codon. In addition, oligonucleotide-mediated two-piece splint ligation was used to generate another mRNA containing a YAG codon in place of the UAG or CAG codon, as described previouslyNone. The 5' half RNA was in vitro transcribed, ending with GAG at its 3' end. The 3' half RNA was chemically synthesized, beginning with PsiAG at its 5' end. The two RNA fragments were aligned through hybridization with a complementary bridging oligodeoxynucleotide, and ligated by T4 DNA ligase. Thus all three mRNA transcripts have the same sequence, except for the codon immediately upstream of the Flag tag (UAG, CAG or PsiAG). In vitro translation was carried out in a 37-mul reaction usingE. colicell lysate (Cosmo Bio Co) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Immediately after the reaction, dot-blot was performed as describedNone. Briefly, small aliquots of the reaction (2.5 mul and 2.5 mul of a 5-fold dilution) were spotted onto the nitrocellulose membrane, and probed with a monoclonal anti-His antibody (H-3; Santa Cruz Biotechnology) or a monoclonal anti-Flag antibody (M2; Sigma-Aldrich). Goat anti-mouse IgG (H+L)-alkaline phosphatase (AP) conjugate (Bio-Rad) was then used as a secondary antibody. His and Flag signals were visualized using 1-Step NBT/BCIP (Pierce). For 30S experiments, the anticodon stem loops of tRNAs (ASLs) and the hexanucleotide mimics of mRNA with sequence 5'-PsiAGPsiAG-3' (for ASLSer) or 5'-PsiGAPsiGA-3' (for ASLPhe) were chemically synthesized (Dharmacon). The ASLs were designed with an extra G26-C44 base pair to improve stability. The tRNASerwas produced and purified as previously reportedNone. Thermus thermophilus30S ribosomal subunits were purified, crystallized and cryoprotected as previously describedNone,None. In the 30S experiments, crystals were soaked for 48 hr in cryoprotection buffer containing 100 muM of the mRNA, 100 muM of the ASL and then flash frozen in liquid nitrogen. In the case of the ASL for tRNAPhewith a PsiAG codon, the addition of paromomycin to100 muM in the cryoprotection buffer improved diffraction from about 3.7 A to 3.1 A, so that structure was solved in the presence of paromomycin. However within the limits of resolution, no difference was seen in the conformation of the decoding center. For the 70S experiment, a complex of the ribosome with mRNA, tRNAfMetin the P site and tRNASerin the A site was crystallized as previously describedNone. The chemically synthesized mRNA was identical to that previously used, except for a PsiAG codon in the A site. Data were collected at Diamond Light Source, Harwell Campues, Oxford, UK beamline I04, integrated and scaled with XDSNoneand refined using REFMACNone. Visualization and model building was done with COOTNone. An initial round of rigid body refinement using the published structure of theThermus themophilus30S (PDB ID 1FJF) or the 70S ribosome (PDB 2WH1 and 2WH2) was followed by restrained maximum-likelihood refinement. A final "jelly body" refinement in REFMACNonefurther lowered the R-factor and also significantly improved the quality of the maps. The mRNA and ASL or tRNA were clearly seen in difference Fourier maps. The final model including the ligands and conformational changes in the ribosome was refined as before. Density for a solvent atom adjacent to the O6 of G and I at the third base pair was assigned to a Mg2+ion based on its coordination and the fact that a water molecule at this position refined to an abnormally low B factor. All figures were drawn using PyMOLNone.