Apical constriction is an epithelial cell shape change that promotes tissue bending during developmental processes such as gastrulation and neural tube closureNone-None. Apical constriction bends epithelia by transforming columnar cells to a wedge shapeNone. DuringDrosophilagastrulation, the apical constriction of presumptive mesoderm cells along the ventral midline results in ventral furrow (VF) formation and tissue invaginationNone,None. Apical constriction and VF formation are induced by the expression of two transcription factors, Twist and SnailNone,None,None. A major question in the field has been how Twist and Snail promote force generation and apical constriction at the molecular level. Forces that drive apical constriction are generated by the contraction of an actin filament (F-actin) network by the molecular motor non-muscle myosin II (Myo-II)None-None. In VF cells, and many other contractile systems, Myo-II contractions and cell shape changes occur in a pulsed or ratchet-like mannerNone-None. Contractile pulses in VF cells occur in the F-actin-Myo-II network spanning the apical domain (medioapical cortex), which pull peripheral adherens junctions (AJs) inward (Fig. 1a)None. After a contraction pulse, the constricted state of the cell is stabilized to incrementally decrease apical area, similar to the mechanism of a ratchetNone. Twist and Snail regulate distinct steps of this ratchet-like constrictionNone. Snail is required to initiate contractile pulses, but the mechanism is unclear. Twist is required to stabilize cell shape between pulses. Two Twist transcriptional targets, Folded gastrulation (Fog) and T48, could function in parallel to activate the Rho1 GTPase apically (Fig. 1b)None,None. It is thought that apical secretion of Fog activates Rho1 signaling and Myo-II recruitment across the apical surface of VF cellsNone-None. How Rho1 stabilizes cell shape is not known and could depend on tension generated by medioapical or junctional cytoskeletal networksNone,None,None. Therefore, elucidating the ratchet mechanism requires determining how Rho1 and its effectors regulate medioapical and junctional actin-myosin networks in response to Twist and Snail. Contractile forces must be coupled to the AJs in order to generate cell and tissue shape changesNone,None-None. AJ remodeling accompanies VF cell apical constriction, with subapical AJs being disassembled, which requires Snail, and spot junctions assembling at the apical cell-cell interfaces, which appears to require Twist (Fig. 1c)None,None,None. It is not known how signals that activate Myo-II are coordinated with AJ remodeling to couple contraction to AJs. Here we visualize how the dynamics of the Myo-II, F-actin, and AJs are coordinated with the Rho1 GTPase pathway to dissect the mechanism of ratchet-like apical constriction. The Rho1 effector Rho-associated kinase (Rok) phosphorylates and activates Myo-II and is required for VF cell apical constriction, suggesting that apical Fog-dependent activation of Rok and Myo-II triggers apical constrictionNone,None. The importance of Rok in polarizing contraction is supported by the fact that planar polarized Rok localizes Myo-II contraction to anterior-posterior cell interfaces during convergent extension of theDrosophilagermband cellsNone-None. Additionally, planar polarized Rok excludes Bazooka/Par-3 from the cortex, establishing complementary domains of Rok/MyoII and AJ proteinsNone. To test the role of Rok in VF cells, we examined Rok localization dynamics using either a kinase-dead Rok allele, Venus(or GFP)::Rok(K116A), or a Venus::Rok(WT) expressed inrokNonemutant germline clonesNone. Venus(or GFP)::Rok(K116A) and Venus::Rok(WT) localization patterns were indistinguishable, and Venus::Rok(WT) rescued the VF invagination defect ofrokNonemutantsNone, suggesting that both Venus::Rok alleles indicate the localization of endogenous Rok (Fig. 1d, e, f, andSupplemental Fig. 1). Rok exhibited apical accumulation in VF cells prior to Rok apical localization in the germband (Fig. 1d). Apical domain proteins normally localize directly above AJs or uniformly across the apical surface of epithelial cellsNone,None. However, Rok displayed an unexpected apical organization, initially exhibiting dispersed staining and then accumulating in medioapical foci as cells constricted (Fig. 1e, f, andSupplemental Fig. 1). In contrast to germband cells, where Rok is present at cell-cell interfacesNone, Rok intensity appeared lowest at the junctions (Fig. 1f, g). Medioapical Rok foci colocalized with Myo-II, consistent with Rok recruiting or stabilizing Myo-II (Fig. 1h). Thus, similar to germband cells, Rok/Myo-II and E-Cadherin are enriched in different domains. However, in VF cells, Rok/Myo-II is concentrated in medioapical foci and AJs are present around the cell circumference, a pattern that we term "radial" cell polarity (RCP). To determine if other Twist pathway components are polarized to medioapical foci, we examined the localization of Rho1 and a Rho1 effector that mediates unbranched actin polymerization and F-actin cable formation, the formin Diaphanous (Dia)None,None,None. Rho1 localized to medioapical foci that partially overlapped Rok foci, but also localized to the junctional domain (Fig. 2a). Dia partially colocalized with medioapical Rho1/Rok foci and junctional Rho1 (Fig. 2b, c). However, Dia exhibited more diffuse staining across the apical domain, which largely colocalized with the F-actin-Myo-II meshwork (Fig. 2d). Therefore, Rho1, Rok, and Dia are differentially localized in the apical domain of VF cells, which suggests that Twist and Rho1 spatially regulate F-actin and Myo-II activity during ratchet-like constriction. We hypothesized that the RCP of Rok might spatially control Myo-II activation or stabilization to regulate contractility or the organization of the apical F-actin network, both of which are important for apical constrictionNone. To determine how medioapical Rho1-Rok foci regulate F-actin network contraction in VF cells, we visualized F-actin and Myo-II dynamics by expressing the F-actin binding domain of Utrophin fused to GFP (Utr::GFP) and the regulatory light chain of Myo-II (spaghetti squash, sqhinDrosophila) fused to mCherry fluorescent protein (Myo::ChFP)None,None. Utr::GFP labels medioapical, junctional, and basolateral networks, similar to phalloidin staining in fixed embryos, demonstrating that Utr::GFP labels F-actin networks in an unbiased manner (Supplemental Fig. 2a, b). Similar to Rok localization, apical Myo-II recruitment occurs in VF cells before germband cells and was associated with structural changes in the F-actin network (Fig. 3a, andSupplemental Videos 1, 2). To analyze F-actin dynamics, we first used custom software to segment individual cells and quantify total apical F-actin levels during apical constrictionNone. In contrast to the increase in apical Myo-II intensity, we found that average total apical F-actin levels decrease over the course of apical constriction, suggesting that F-actin network depolymerization accompanies constriction (Supplemental Fig. 2c). However, during contraction pulses we often observed brief increases or stabilization of F-actin intensity (Fig. 3b, andSupplemental Fig. 2d, e). The increase or stabilization of F-actin intensity was associated with F-actin condensation into medioapical foci (Fig. 3c). Following F-actin condensation, F-actin foci were subsequently remodeled, often into cables, and F-actin intensity appeared to decrease as area stabilized (Fig. 3c, d, andSupplemental Fig. 2d). The mechanism for this F-actin remodeling is unclear, but F-actin depolymerization is possibly required to regenerate actin monomers that are then assembled into new F-actin cables. Medioapical F-actin condensation and dissolution occurred simultaneously with Myo-II (Fig. 3d-f), suggesting that F-actin condensation represents contraction of the medioapical F-actin cortex. To determine whether medioapical F-actin condensation requires Rok, we injected embryos with the Rok inhibitor, Y-27632None. Y-27632-injected embryos failed to accumulate cortical Myo-II, consistent with previous observationsNone, and cells did not constrict (Fig. 3g). However, medioapical F-actin was prominent in VF cells after Y-27632 injection. F-actin filaments or cables continuously assembled and disassembled (Fig. 3h, i, andSupplemental Video 3). F-actin cables originated from medioapically and junctionally, consistent with Rho1 and Dia localization at both locations (Fig. 3i). Despite robust medioapical F-actin assembly, F-actin cables failed to condense into medioapical foci in Y-27632 injected embryos (Supplemental Videos 2, 3). Thus, RCP of Rok is dispensable for medioapical F-actin assembly, but is required to condense medioapical F-actin cables that span the apical domain, presumably by targeting Myo-II to the medioapical cortex. Our visualization of F-actin cable assembly at both the medioapical cortex and junctions of Y-27632-injected VF cells suggested that Rho1 could activate Dia to stimulate F-actin assembly across the apical domain. Furthermore, Y-27632-injected germband cells have less pronounced medioapical F-actin cables than in VF cells (Fig. 3h), supporting a previous study that suggested that signals in VF cells enhance medioapical F-actin assembly relative to germband cellsNone. To test the function of F-actin assembly during apical constriction, we injected embryos with Cytochalasin D (CytoD), which binds the barbed end of F-actin and inhibits polymerizationNone. High CytoD concentrations blocked apical constriction and disrupted the F-actin-Myo-II network, resulting in apical Myo-II spots that fail to coalesce, as previously reported (Fig. 4a, b)None. We titrated the amount of injected CytoD to identify processes that were most sensitive to reduced F-actin assembly. Lower CytoD concentrations allowed VF cells to assemble an apical F-actin-Myo-II network and initiate constriction (Fig. 4a, b). Normally, VF cells undergo contractile pulses, resulting in a significant positive cross-correlation between calculated constriction rate and Myo-II accumulation rate due to in-phase contraction pulses (Supplemental Fig. 2f)None,None. Despite undergoing apical constriction and Myo-II accumulation, we failed to observe obvious Myo-II pulses in embryos injected with low CytoD concentrations, which was supported by the lack of a cross-correlation between constriction rate and myosin rate (Fig. 4c, d). Also, low CytoD concentrations destabilized the connection between the medioapical actin-myosin network and cell-cell junctions, with networks transiently losing and then regaining connections to each other across the tissue (Fig. 4a, andSupplemental Videos 4-6). Low CytoD concentrations resulted in gaps in the medioapical F-actin cortex that preceded junction detachments, demonstrating that defects in medioapical F-actin network continuity precipitate separation of the medioapical network from cell-cell junctions (Fig. 4e, andSupplemental Video 7). Overall, these results demonstrate that robust apical F-actin assembly is critical for medioapical contraction pulses and to form a stable connection between the contractile medioapical domain and AJs. Dia was previously shown to be important for VF formationNone. To determine whether Dia mediates F-actin assembly and junction attachment, we generated germline clones using the partial loss-of-functiondiaNoneallele (diaNone)None. We were unable to analyze VF formation indiaNoneembryos with strong phenotypes, because these had severe defects during cellularization, which precedes gastrulationNone-None. However,diaNoneembryos with mild cellularization phenotypes had apical Myo-II accumulation and exhibited transient losses in the connections between medioapical F-actin-Myo-II network and junctions, similar to embryos injected with low CytoD concentrations (Fig. 5a, b, andSupplemental Video 8). Together with the CytoD injections, our results suggest that Dia-dependent F-actin assembly in part mediates medioapical and junctional F-actin assembly to link the medioapical cortex to AJs. Dia-mediated F-actin assembly could facilitate apical constriction by generating medioapical F-actin cables to facilitate Myo-II contraction (Fig. 3cand4e), but could also regulate the organization of AJsNone,None,None,None. Because Twist has been proposed to be required for apical AJ formationNone, we examined E-Cadherin localization indiaNonemutants. We found that E-Cadherin localized apically indiaNonemutants. However, E-Cadherin was not restricted to the junctional domain, but spread across the entire apical surface, which is different from E-Cadherin localization indiaNonemutants for other cell typesNone(Fig. 5c). While it is possible that some of this apical E-Cadherin is present in endocytic vesicles and not cortical (Supplemental Fig. 3)None,None, it is clear that there is a disruption in the localization and polarity of E-Cadherin indiaNonemutants. E-Cadherin polarity was also lost after CytoD injection (Fig. 5d). Interestingly, defects in Dia-mediated F-actin assembly results in a similar loss of cortical domains or "compartments" during the process of cellularization, potentially from misregulation of endocytic activityNone,None,None. Thus, Dia-mediated F-actin assembly is required in VF cells for the RCP of apical E-Cadherin, restricting E-Cadherin to the junctional domain. The cell-cell attachment defect is unlikely to result from lower E-Cadherin levels at the junctional domain because medioapical networks can regain attachments (Fig. 5a), whereas AJ mutants result in permanent dissociations between the medioapical network and the junctionsNone. We propose that Dia-mediated F-actin assembly could facilitate the attachment between the medioapical contractile network and junctions by spatially segregating contractile and junctional components into distinct domains, providing definitive anchor points at the cell periphery (Fig. 5e, AJ depolarization). In addition, Dia could be required to assemble medioapical and junctional F-actin cables to link the two domains (Fig. 5e, Network dissolution). Our results demonstrate that the spatial regulation of Myo-II recruitment, F-actin assembly, and AJ organization cooperate to achieve ratchet-like apical constriction. Thus, Twist expression could stabilize pulsed contractions by controlling F-actin, Myo-II, or AJs in specific cellular domains. Recently, cell shape fluctuations resulting from medioapical contractions were proposed to be stabilized by junctional actin-myosin networksNone,None. Because Rho1 and Dia localize both medioapically and junctionally in VF cells, we tested whether Twist is required for either of these F-actin networks. In contrast to wild-type VF cells, which exhibit a continuous meshwork of medioapical and junctional F-actin cables, visualization of Utr::GFP intwistmutants demonstrated that thetwistmutant results in dynamic medioapical F-actin puncta that fail to form cables across the apical domain (Fig. 6a, andSupplemental Video 9). Importantly,twistmutants have junctional F-actin cables (Fig. 6a, b), which display similar intensity to junctional F-actin in lateral germband cells (furrow:germband ratio=0.96, n=20 cells). twistmutants exhibited a lower medioapical:junctional F-actin ratio, suggesting thattwistmutants are defective in the formation of the medioapical F-actin network relative to junctional F-actin (Fig. 6c). This contrasts withsnailmutants, which lack medioapical and apical junctional F-actin cables (Fig. 6a-c, andSupplemental Video 9). Because Twist is required for cell shape stabilization after pulses, we examined F-actin dynamics over the course of individual pulsatile events. In wild-type cells, F-actin levels usually increase or remain stable during the contraction and persist as F-actin cables (Fig. 3b). However, intwistmutants, the F-actin network is always punctate and F-actin levels decrease during contraction (Fig. 6a, d, e). Overall, these results suggest that Twist facilitates medioapical F-actin assembly. Importantly,twistmutants did not result in E-Cadherin depolarization, suggesting that the medioapical meshwork of F-actin cables contributes to cell shape stabilization independently from regulating E-Cadherin RCP (Fig. 7e). We previously demonstrated thattwistis required for apical Myo-II persistence following pulsed contractionsNone. The RCP of Rok suggests that medioapical Myo-II phosphorylation could be coordinated with F-actin assembly to stabilize medioapical actin-myosin cables that prevent cell relaxation. Therefore, we examined whether Twist regulates the RCP of Rok. Previous work suggested that the Twist pathway is required for the apical localization of the Rho1 activator, DRhoGEF2 (Fig. 1b)None. Unexpectedly, we found apical Rok enrichment intwistmutants VF cells (Supplemental Fig. 4). However, the normal RCP of Rok was inverted intwistmutants, with Rok exhibiting junctional localization at three-way vertices, rather than localizing medioapically (Fig. 7a). snailmutants also exhibited a defect in medioapical Rok recruitment (Fig. 7a). However, Rok localizes to a subapical position, consistent with the position of AJs insnailmutants (Fig. 7b)None. Subapical Rok localization did not exhibit a clear dorsal-ventral polarity insnailmutants, demonstrating that Twist requires Snail to recruit apical Rok (Supplemental Fig. 4). Consistent with Rok locally stabilizing Myo-II, changes in Myo-II localization mirrored Rok, with Myo-II becoming enriched in apical or subapical vertices intwistandsnailmutants, respectively (Fig. 7c, d). Intwistandsnailmutants, Myo-II, and presumably Rok, colocalized with apical and subapical AJs, respectively (Fig. 7e). Thus, Twist and Snail are required to polarize Rok to the medioapical domain and away from AJs. twistmutants continued to exhibit transient medioapical Myo-II pulses between Myo-II foci at vertices, but medioapical Myo-II was not stabilized (Fig. 7c). Thus, medioapical Rok foci appear to stabilize Myo-II in the medioapical cortex of VF cells. We propose that the function of Twist is not simply to activate apical Rho1 and Rok, but that Twist polarizes Rho1 signaling in the plane of the apical surface, leading to the polarization of Rok and Myo-II to the medioapical domain. We have demonstrated a spatial organization to Twist pathway components, which polarizes Rok/Myo-II and E-Cadherin/AJs to medioapical and junctional domains, respectively. The enrichment of Rok/Myo-II and E-Cadherin/AJs to separate domains is similar to the process of cell-cell intercalation duringDrosophilagermband extensionNone-None. However, Rok/Myo-II and AJ components exhibit planar cell polarity (PCP) in germband cells, whereas they exhibit "radial" cell polarity (RCP) in VF cells (Fig. 8a). Dia-mediated F-actin polymerization appears to maintain E-Cadherin polarity and link the medioapical and junctional domains in VF cells, allowing contractile forces to be stably transmitted across AJs. Thus, Myo-II stabilization, AJ organization, and F-actin assembly are temporally and spatially coordinated to drive ratchet-like apical constriction (Fig. 8b). During VF cell apical constriction, Rok becomes concentrated as medioapical foci and is absent or present at low levels at AJs. The RCP of Rok appears to target Myo-II accumulation to the medioapical domain. The importance of Rok localization is strongly supported by the fact that the RCP of both Rok and Myo-II are inverted intwistandsnailmutants, with Rok and Myo-II accumulating inappropriately at AJs. Although Rok is improperly localized in both mutants,twistmutants still exhibit contractile pulses, suggesting that the apical Rok at AJs or low levels of Rok in the medioapical domain are sufficient to promote Myo-II pulses. We propose that Rok's localization increases Myo-II phosphorylation when Myo-II reaches the medioapical domain either by diffusion or contractile flow, leading to increased minifilament assembly and stabilization of Myo-II structures (Fig. 8b)None,None. The inappropriate localization of Rok intwistmutants suggests that Myo-II assembly in the medioapical domain, rather than junctions, is critical to stabilize cell shape between pulses for cells to constrict like a ratchet. Medioapical contractility and epithelial tension requires that the contractile cortex be coupled to the junctional domainNone,None. Rho1 and Dia localize to both the medioapical and junctional domains, and we observe F-actin cables originating from both locations in the absence of Rok and Myo-II activity. Reducing F-actin assembly using CytoD ordiaNonemutants destabilizes the connection between the medioapical contractile network and the junctional domain. Interestingly, CytoD anddiaNonemutants cause E-Cadherin to accumulate across the entire apical surface rather than being restricted to the junctional domain. Dia-mediated F-actin assembly could polarize E-Cadherin through clathrin-mediated endocytosis, as was described in germband cellsNone, thus removing medioapical E-Cadherin. F-actin-dependent regulation of endocytosis has also been proposed to establish cortical domains duringDrosophilacellularizationNone,None,None. Thus, Dia could function to separate E-Cadherin from peak Rok activity, creating discrete anchor points at cell-cell interfaces that can be pulled inwards by Myo-II. In addition, F-actin assembly is required to form a continuous meshwork of F-actin cables that connects the medioapical and junctional domains. twistmutants maintain E-Cadherin RCP but lack a continuous meshwork of medioapical F-actin cables, suggesting that F-actin assembly contributes to the actin-myosin ratchet independently from regulating AJ polarity. Our data suggests that Myo-II localization and F-actin assembly are coordinated to prevent cell relaxation. First, disruption of F-actin turnover and meshwork formation using F-actin inhibitors, such as CytoD, does not disrupt apical Myo-II recruitmentNone. Second, F-actin cable assembly occurs continuously in Rok inhibitor injected embryos that lack apical Myo-II. Therefore, we propose that the combination of localizing Myo-II stabilization to the medioapical cortex while more broadly activating medioapical and junctional F-actin assembly results in the formation of contractile cables that span the apical domain of VF cells and become anchored at discrete AJ sites (Fig. 8b). These actin-myosin cables could function like stress-fibers to prevent cell relaxation after contractile pulses and form a supracellular meshworkNone. Planar polarized actomyosin and AJ localization results in cell-cell intercalation whereas radially polarized actomyosin and AJ localization causes apical constriction (Fig. 8a)None,None,None,None. This is illustrated by the fact that Rok and Dia localize medioapically in VF cells to drive apical constriction, whereas Dia activation in the germband induces Myo-II accumulation at vertical junctions that contain RokNone. Therefore, developmental cues, such as Twist and Snail, must properly orient Myo-II, F-actin assembly, and AJ organization to elicit the appropriate cell shape changeNone. Importantly, we show that the function of Twist is not simply to activate, but to polarize apical signals like Rok to spatially regulate Myo-II stabilization and F-actin assembly. Determining the mechanism that establishes RCP will be critical to determine how the common set of signaling and cytoskeletal proteins are regulated to generate different cell shape changes during morphogenesisNone,None.