Macrophage infiltration is associated with poor prognosis in several different types of cancer, including breast cancer and melanoma. None,None,NoneThe umbrella term 'tumor infiltrating myeloid cells' (TIMs) is used to describe mature myeloid cells and macrophages found within the tumor microenvironment, though it is likely unique subsets of cells mediate different steps in malignant disease progression. NoneMyeloid cells are crucial for establishing the pre-metastatic niche and fostering metastatic tumor growth. None,None,NoneMammary TIMs are known to produce several growth factors and molecules including MMP9 and VEGFA that aid metastasis. None,NoneMelanoma associated myeloid cells also secrete factors such as CCL2, MMP9, Adrenomedullin and IFN-gamma that promote tumor cell invasiveness and enhance melanomagenesis. None,None,NoneDespite the growing body of evidence implicating TIMs in malignant disease progression, the mechanisms by which they remodel the distal metastatic site remain poorly defined. In addition, pathways that are activated in TIMs in response to cues from the metastatic tumor microenvironment that enable tumor establishment and growth are yet to be delineated. The microRNAs (miRs) are small non-coding RNAs that act as powerful post-transcriptional regulators of cellular functions whose activities are frequently deranged in tumor cells. NoneRecent reports highlight the critical role that microRNA play in regulating inflammatory responses and macrophage polarization. None,NoneIn the context of breast cancer, miR-155 and miR-511-3p expression in TIMs elicit tumor suppressive properties, leading to the inhibition of primary tumor growth. None,NoneIn the current study, evidence for a CSF1-ETS2 pathway driven oncogenic microRNA expression signature that includes miR-21 and miR-29a is presented. These oncogenic miRs function in metastasis-associated myeloid cells to promote tumor proliferation and angiogenesis. Further, our findings suggest that the oncogenic miRs are necessary for metastasis as specific ablation of Dicer in mature myeloid cells retards metastatic tumor progression in mouse models of both metastatic breast cancer and melanoma. In addition, knockdown on miR-21 and mir-29a in macrophages impedes tumor cell proliferation. Analysis of human metastatic breast cancer samples implicates miR-21 and miR-29a in patients with metastatic disease. In order to identify microRNA that are regulated in metastatic TIMs, an experimental metastasis assay was designed to examine metastatic melanoma and mammary tumors at early and late stages (Figure 1a). Briefly, metastatic B16 melanoma or MVT1 mammary tumor cells were injected via the tail vein in to syngeneic mice (C57/BL6 and FVB/N backgrounds, respectively). Lungs were harvested 1 and 2 weeks post injection of tumor cells to capture metastases at different stages of growth (Figure 1b). Subsequently, global microRNA profiling of RNA isolated from lung TIMs at the two timepoints was performed. 17 microRNA were seen to be up-regulated at 2 weeks compared to 1 week post injection ( greater than 2 fold) in melanoma associated macrophages (Figure 1c;Supplementary Table S1a) whereas the expression of 8 miRs increased ( greater than 2 fold) in metastatic mammary tumor TIMs (Figure 1d;Supplementary Table S1b). Notably, 5 miRs namely miR-21, miR-29a, miR-142-3p, miR-181a and miR-223 were up-regulated in TIMs from both tumor models (Figure 1e). In contrast, although several miRs were downregulated in tumor TIMs from both melanoma and mammary tumor models, there was no overlap between the two groups. To elucidate signaling upstream of the miRs that regulates their expression, we analyzed regulatory regions surrounding the coding loci of the 5 miRs to identify transcription factor binding motifs. Intriguingly, we found conserved ETS motifs proximal to all 5 miR loci. Our group has previously shown that deletion of the transcription factorEts2in macrophages resulted in reduced metastatic tumor burden in three different models of metastasis. NoneTo test the hypothesis that ETS2 may regulate these miRs, miR expression was analyzed in mature myeloid cells with deletion ofEts2. Ets2depletion in TIMs in the MVT1 model resulted in a down-regulation of 4 of the 5 miRs, namely miR-21, miR-29a, miR-142-3p and miR-223 (Figure 2a). We performed standard chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays on the four microRNA loci using primers designed around the putative ETS-binding sites. ChIP experiments on bone marrow derived macrophages(BMMs) confirmed that ETS2 is enriched at all four miR loci. Further, binding was ablated whenEts2was deleted in macrophages (Figure 2b-e). ETS2 expression and phosphorylation is mediated via the CSF1-ERK pathway. NoneA highly selective inhibitor of CSF1R kinase activity, GW2580 (ref. 19), was employed to confirm that the miRs were downstream of the CSF1-ETS2 pathway. Mice were treated with GW2580 via oral gavage beginning the 4th day post-injection of metastatic MVT1 cells for 3 consecutive days (days 4-6). Lungs were harvested 7 days post-injection for analysis. In parallel, TIMs were sorted from lungs of the treated mice to determine whether miR expression changes in response to drug treatment. Myeloid cells from the lungs of GW2580 treated mice exhibited lower levels of the four ETS2-responsive miRs (Figure 2f). Concomitantly, GW2580 treatment led to a significant 20% reduction in tumor cell proliferation in the lungs of treated mice compared to controls (Figure 2g). At this stage there was little evidence of tumor angiogenesis in either treatment or control group (data not shown) so mice were sacrificed at later stages to assess blood vessel growth. For these experiments, mice were treated with GW2580 beginning on day 9 for 5 consecutive days (days 9-13). Lungs were harvested on day 14 for histological analysis. The size of blood vessels as well as vessel branching were decreased by GW2580 treatment (Figure 2h) though there was no effect on tumor cell proliferation at this stage (Supplementary Figure S1a).GW2580 treatment didn't alter macrophage infiltration in lung lesions (Supplementary Figure S1b) and treatment of tumor cells with GW2580 didn't affect miR-21 or miR-29a levels (Supplementary Figure S1c). Conditional deletion of the endonucleaseDicerwas utilized to assess the functional consequence of miR depletion on metastasis. Lys-cre, which is active only in mature myeloid cells and macrophagesNone, was utilized to achieve specific deletion ofDicerand a simultaneous reduction of all four miRs (Supplementary Figure S2a,b,c). TIMs were sorted from metastatic lungs 2 weeks post injection of B16 melanoma cells from mice with conditional knockout ofDicer(DicerKO) and wild-type controls. The expression of miR-21, miR-29a, miR-142-3p and miR-223 were all seen to decrease inDicerKO TIMs (Supplementary Figure S2d). To determine if ablation of miR expression in macrophages affects metastasis, wild-type and experimental mice were injected with either B16 melanoma cells or the EO771 metastatic mammary tumor cell line. C57/Bl6 EO771 cells were used since theDicerKO mice were on a C57/Bl6 background. Lungs were harvested 2 weeks post injection for histology. DicerKO mice exhibited considerably less metastatic tumor burden when compared to wild-type controls in both the metastatic melanoma (Figure 3a) and mammary tumor models (Figure 3d). Immunofluorescent staining revealed that there was a reduction in tumor cell proliferation in the metastatic melanoma (Figure 3b) and mammary tumor (Figure 3e) lung lesions in the Dicer KO mice relative to controls. This was accompanied by a decrease in angiogenesis in the melanoma (Figure 3c) and mammary tumor (Figure 3f) models. There was no difference in macrophage infiltration in metastatic tumors between the genotypes (Supplementary Figure S2e). To test whether the miRs function in a non-cell autonomous manner to promote metastatic tumor growth, matrigel plug assays were used to study the effect of overexpression and knockdown of individual miRs in macrophages (see Materials and Methods). There was no difference in macrophage numbers in plugs with miR-21, miR-29a over-expressing macrophages when compared to the scrambled control (Supplementary Figure S3a). Over-expression of miR-21 and miR-29a in macrophages caused increased growth of blood vessels into the matrigel plugs as revealed by CD31 staining whereas knockdown of miR-21 resulted in reduced angiogenesis (Figure 4a,c). Knockdown of mir-29a didn't have a significant effect on angiogenesis which might be due to redundancy between miR-29a and other miR-29 family members, including miR-29b and miR-29c. miR-21 and miR-29a overexpression in macrophages also promoted tumor cell proliferation in the plug assay while knockdown of the miRs led to a significant reduction in proliferation (Figure 4b,d). Exogenous miR-21 and miR-29a expression in macrophages co-cultured with MVT1 cellsin vitroincreased tumor cell proliferation (Figure 4e). Co-transfection of both mir-21 and mir-29a in macrophages didn't appear to significantly affect angiogenesis and tumor cell proliferation compared to individual miRs (Figure 4a,b,e). miR-142-3p and miR-223 overexpression also led to increased angiogenesis but had no discernable effect on tumor cell proliferation (Supplementary Figure S3b). Similar results were obtained upon miR-21, miR-29a and miR-223 over-expression in macrophages in a melanoma matrigel model (Supplementary Figure S3c,d). Expression of putative mRNA targets of the onco-miRs, identifiedin silico,along with genes important for M2 polarizationNone,None,None,None,None, was analyzed using the nanostring platform. Intriguingly, 13 miR-29a target genes have previously been reported to be regulated by ETS2 (Supplementary Table S2) (ref.17). TIMs were sorted from lungs 2 days, 1 week and 2 weeks post MVT1 injection and subjected to expression profiling. A striking negative correlation between miR-21 and miR-29 levels and the expression of putative target genes (marked by red asterisks inFigure 5a,Supplementary Table S2) was observed. In particular, there was decreased expression of genes associated with M1 polarization, likeFasandIl12a(Figure 5a). This was accompanied by upregulation of M2-like genes, such asArg1andCd204in macrometastases associated TIMs (Figure 5a). Similarly, the expression of a cadre of genes associated with the negative regulation of angiogenesis was seen to decrease, while positive regulatorsHif1aandVegfaincreased (Figure 5a). A subset of these anti-tumor targets were confirmed via ectopic expression of these miRs in BMMs, which led to reduced mRNA levels of the miR-21 targetsPdcd4,Spry1andTimp3(Figure 5b) and the miR-29a targetsCol4a2,SparcandTimp3(Figure 5d). Further, protein levels of miR targets were also seen to decrease in these assays (Figure 5c,e). Conversely, immunofluorescent staining revealed that knockdown of the miRs results in increased expression of the common target TIMP3in vivo(Figure 5f). The anti-angiogenic genesCol4a2,Fbn1andSparcwere also confirmed to be miR-29 targets through reporter luciferase assays (Supplementary Figure S3e). To assess the relevance of the miRs identified in our mouse models to human metastatic cancer, human brain metastatic breast cancer samples were analyzed. Immunostaining for the activated form of the CSF1R, CSF1R-pY723 and the macrophage/microglia marker IBA1, was performed on nine independent patient samples to test whether the CSF1/CSF1R pathway is active in human metastatic disease (Figure 6a). We observed that CSF1R-pY723 could be detected in 25-45% IBA1+ cells in all nine human samples tested (Figure 6a). Further, double staining of these samples using a CSF1R antibody recognizing all forms of the receptor in combination with anti-Keratin8 demonstrated that tumor cells did not express CSF1R (Supplementary Figure S4a). Because earlier studies had revealed that miR-21 and miR-29a are up-regulated in invasive breast cancer, we selected them for further analysis in the brain metastatic tumors. None,NoneThe expression of miR-21 and miR-29a in CSF1R+ cells was determined by performing double microRNA/mRNAin situhybridization in combination withCsf1rmRNA (Figure 6b,c,d). The experiments demonstrated that on average 50% ofCsf1rmRNA positive cells also expressed miR-21 (Figure 6c,Supplementary Figure S4b) and ~75% co-localized with miR-29a expression (Figure 6d,Supplementary Figure S4c). While mir-21 expression was limited to cells that co-expressCsf1rmRNA, miR-29a was found to be highly expressed in other cells, primarily in tumor cells based on nuclear morphology. In parallel studies, the co-expression ofCsf1rmRNA and miR-29a was studied on a separate cohort of patient samples for which lymph node metastases and matched primary tumors were available. Due to limiting amounts of tissue, expression of miR-29a alone could be analyzed (Figure 6e,Supplementary Figure S4d). We observed that the number ofCsf1rmRNA+ cells infiltrating lymph node metastases was higher than in the primary tumor (Figure 6f). In addition, there was a striking increase in miR-29a levels inCsf1r+ cells in lymph node metastases when compared to matched primary tumors (Figure 6g). Tumors exert a systemic effect on myeloid cells that is critical for colonization and growth of metastases. None,NoneConsistent with previous work, tumor growth in the lungs of mice injected with MVT1 cells correlated with a significant expansion of CD11b+GR1+ myeloid cells in the bone marrow (Figure 7a). The levels of miR-21 and miR-29a increased in this CD11b+GR1+ population (Figure 7b,c). To determine if a similar expansion occurs in metastatic breast cancer patients, we analyzed the CD115+ (CSF1R+) myeloid population of leukocytes in the blood of patients. An increase in the percentage of CD115+ cells in patients (n=13) compared to normal volunteer controls (n=8) was detected (Figure 7d). Further analysis of the CD115+ population demonstrated that a CD14loCD16hinon-classical monocyte populationNonewas significantly expanded in the metastatic cancer patients, while the CD14hiCD16loclassical monocyte population was depleted (Figure 7e). The CD115hiCD14loCD16hipopulation was collected and the expression of miR-21 and miR-29a was determined. For this analysis, the patient samples were classified as "low" or "high" metastatic burden based on bone scans or PET scans revealing visceral metastasis, especially for the high group (Figure 7f,Supplementary Figure S5a,b). The expression of both miR-21 and miR-29a were significantly up-regulated in the CD115hiCD14loCD16hipopulation in patients with high metastatic tumor burden in visceral organs when compared to patients with limited metastasis (Figure 7g). Research over the past decade has established the role of TIMs in promoting multiple steps in the metastatic cascade. NoneThe present work focused on the function of mature myeloid cells during the last stage of metastatic disease progression, the growth of tumors at the distant organ site. These studies demonstrate that miR-21 and miR-29a expression is activated in TIMs in mouse models of metastasis, promoting tumor angiogenesis and tumor cell proliferation. Notably, the two oncomiRs are robustly expressed in CSF1R-positive macrophages located in human breast cancer brain and lymph node metastases, while expression is lower in primary tumors. Taken in sum, these experiments reveal a novel CSF1-ETS2-miR pathway in myeloid cells that controls the proliferation and growth of metastatic tumors. However, the myeloid cell markers employed in this study, namely F4/80 and Csf1r-YFP, are expressed on various myeloid sub-classes present in the metastatic microenvironment, including inflammatory monocytesNone, F4/80+ myeloid derived suppressor cellsNoneand Tie2 expressing monocytesNone. Further studies are required to delineate the exact identity of the miR-expressing cells contributing to angiogenesis and tumor growth. The results presented provide new insights into post-transcriptional regulatory mechanisms in metastatic TIMs. Reports on microRNA dysregulation in TIMs so far have mostly focused on tumor suppressor miRs such as miR-155 and miR-511 in primary tumors. None,NoneInterestingly, the expression of both these miRs didn't change significantly in metastatic melanoma and mammary tumor derived TIMs, suggesting that unique post-transcriptional mechanisms may operate at metastatic sites. Our studies revealed that global depletion of miRs impeded metastatic tumor growth and angiogenesis in mouse models of melanoma as well as breast cancer. In addition, knockdown of either miR-21 or miR-29a in macrophages led to reduced tumor cell proliferation. These results suggest that the oncogenic effects of miRs in TIMs are dominant over tumor suppressive effects. Our studies identified targets downstream of the miRs that enable their pro-tumor function. A negative correlation between the expression of miR-21/miR-29a and key M1 polarizing molecules in metastatic TIMs including IL-12, IL-23 IFN-gamma, PDCD4 and TNF-alpha was observed. Consistent with this data, reports implicate these miRs in inhibiting M1/Th1 type inflammation while promoting M2/Th2 polarization through regulation of these target genes. None,None,None,None,NoneA cohort of genes involved in repressing angiogenesis are also targets of the oncomirs, including the miR21 targetTimp3(ref. 36,37) and miR-29a targets such asCol4a2 and Col18a1(ref. 38). The data suggests that miR-21 and miR-29a promote an 'M2'-like, pro-angiogenic phenotype in tumor associated myeloid cells through their repression of anti-angiogenic and 'M1' genes. Importantly, miR-21 and miR-29a overexpression in macrophages eitherin vivoorin vitropromoted tumor cell proliferation, consistent with the acquisition of a pro-tumor M2 phenotype. None,NoneHowever, co-transfection of miR-21 and mir-29a didn't appear to have a synergistic effect, suggesting that the downstream targets common to both miRs may be the ones that are critical for the miR's pro-tumor functions. One such target may be the MMP inhibitor TIMP3, whose expression was seen to increase when either mir-21 or miR-29 were knocked down. The combined effect of these miRs in promoting angiogenesis and thwarting anti-tumor immune responses may act as a catalyst for micro-metastases to proliferate at the metastatic site. A recent study demonstrates that tumor cell secreted miR-21 and miR-29a activate pro-tumor functions in myeloid cells. NoneIn addition, macrophages are also known to release microRNA through microvesiclesNoneand miR-21 acts as an oncogene even within tumor cells. None,NoneConceivably, these miRs in TIMs may function both in an autocrine and paracrine fashion to remodel the metastatic tumor microenvironment. Our results also highlight the synergy between CSF1 driven transcriptional and post-transcriptional gene regulation in tumor associated myeloid cells. ETS2, a well-defined nuclear effector of CSF1/MAPK signaling, functions to modulate expression of several of the identified miRs. Further, ETS2 represses anti-angiogenic targets, for example TIMP3, at both the transcriptional levelNone, and indirectly at the post-transcriptional level through miR-21 and miR-29a. The coupling of gene regulatory mechanisms by ETS2 may allow for a more rapid and complete response to CSF1 locally and systemically. From a therapeutic standpoint, our work underscores the potential utility of targeting CSF1-ETS2 signaling along with tumor-targeted therapies at metastatic sites. Inhibiting CSF1 signaling not only altered miR expression in myeloid cells, but also affected tumor cell proliferation and angiogenesis. Inhibition of the signaling upstream of the miRs might also be more beneficial than targeting the miRs themselves as some reports ascribe a tumor suppressive role for miR-29 in epithelial cellsNoneand Dicer acts as a haploinsufficient tumor suppressor in certain tumors. NoneRecent studies in preclinical models of breast cancer, melanoma and glioma provide evidence for the efficacy of targeting tumor macrophages using CSF1R inhibitors to improve therapies directed at primary tumors. None,None,None,NoneOur findings suggest that targeting CSF1 signaling may also be effective in the treatment of metastatic tumors that cause the majority of patient mortality in breast cancer and melanoma. Another intriguing observation from our studies was the systemic expansion of myeloid populations in both our mouse models and human metastatic breast cancer. The activation of miR-21 and miR-29a expression occurs both in CD11b+GR1+ cells in the bone marrow of metastatic tumor bearing mice and CD115+ non-classical monocytes from patients, and inhibition of the CSF1 signaling pathway in mouse models resulted in decreased miR-21 and miR-29a levels in TIMs. Therefore, the expression of the CSF1-dependent miRs could potentially be utilized as a correlative biomarker for therapeutic efficacy in patients being treated with CSF1 signaling inhibitors currently in Phase I clinical trials for the treatment of solid tumors. Collectively, our findings provide key insights into the pro-tumor function of microRNA in metastatic tumor associated myeloid cells. We delineate a CSF1-ETS2 activated miR signature in the metastatic tumor microenvironment that mediates cross-talk between epithelial cells and macrophages and accelerates metastatic tumor progression via multiple mechanisms. It remains to be seen whether a similar microRNA signature exists in the case of other metastatic solid cancers. In addition, identification of other signaling pathways that synergize with CSF1 signaling in the metastatic tumor microenvironment will be vital for the development of effective therapies to combat metastatic disease. TheEts2Noneallele,Ets2Noneknockout allele, andLys-Creknockin allele have been previously described. None,None,NoneThec-fms-YFP(Csf1r-YFP) construct has been described previously. NoneAll these alleles were bred greater than 10 generations into the FVB/N background. The DicerNoneand a separateLys-Creon a C57Bl/6 background were obtained from Jackson Laboratories (Bar Harbor, ME, USA). All mice were taken care of according to the guidelines provided by the Ohio State University Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. The metastatic mammary tumor cell lines MVT1 and E0771 have been described previously. None,NoneThe B16 melanoma cell lineNonewas used for experimental melanoma metastasis and matrigel assays. All cell lines were maintained in DMEM containing 10% FBS at 37 degrees C in a 5% CO2incubator. To obtain BMMs, bone marrow precursors were flushed out from the femurs and tibiae of 4 week old female FVB/N or C57Bl/6 mice and cultured in 25 ng/ml CSF1 for 4 days in non- tissue culture treated square dishes. BMMs were transfected with 10nM microRNA precursors, anti-miR oligos or scrambled controls using the Amaxa Nucleofector system (Lonza, Walkersville, MD, USA) for the matrigel plug assays andin vitrotumor cell-BMM admixture studies. For orthotopic tail vein injections, 7-10 week old female FVB/N or C57Bl/6 mice were placed in a tail vein restrainer device (Braintree Scientific, Braintree, MA, USA). After dilating either lateral vein, a 28 1/2 G insulin syringe needle was used to inject 3*106MVT1, 5*105EO771 or B16 melanoma cells re-suspended in 200ul sterile PBS. Mice were harvested 2 days, 1 week and 2 weeks post injection. For subcutaneous matrigel plug injections, 6-10 week old female FVB/N or C57Bl/6 mice were injected in the flank with 350ul of ice cold matrigel containing 2.5 * 105MVT1or B16 melanoma cells admixed with 2.5 * 105BMMs. Plugs were harvested and embedded in OCT 5 days post injection for histology. Tumor bearing lungs were minced and digested enzymatically using collagenase type 2 (Worthington, Lakewood, NJ) and DNaseI (Roche Applied Science, Indianapolis, IN, USA) at 37 degrees C with constant shaking. The Csf1r-YFP or F4/80 positive myeloid populations (TIMs) were sorted on the BD FACS Aria/ AriaIII. For bone marrow studies, bone marrow precursors were flushed out from the femurs and tibiae of metastatic tumor bearing mice and myeloid cells were sorted using PE conjugated anti-CD11b (BD Pharmingen, San Jose, CA, USA) and APC conjugated anti-GR1 antibodies (eBioscience, San Diego, CA, USA). Forin vivostudies, GW2580 (LC Labs, Woburn, MA, USA) was suspended in a 0.5% hydroxypropylmethylcellulose and 0.05% Tween-80 solution. Animals were gavaged with 160mg/kg GW2580 daily until they were sacrificed. NoneRNA isolation from TRIzol (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) was performed according to manufacturer's instructions. A custom nCounter mRNA gene expession codeset (Nanostring Technologies, Seattle, WA, USA) (Supplementary TableS2) was built to analyze expression of miR target genes and genes relevant to pro-tumor processes in TIMs. Data was normalized to the geometric mean of the top 50 expressors. For microRNA analysis, the nCounter mouse miRNA expression assay from Nanostring Technologies was used. Data was normalized using the geometric mean of top 100 expressors. The nCounter microRNA assay was used to determine the counts of microRNA in Dicer WT and Dicer KO TIMs. For all experiments, negative control counts were used to set the background for expression of the miRs. SinceDicerdeletion results in a global depletion of microRNA, technical normalization relative to positive control RNA counts was utilized. Tissue and matrigel plugs were either frozen or fixed in formalin and paraffin embedded. 5 mum sections were prepared for immunostaining. The following primary antibodies were utilized: rat alpha-mouse F4/80 (1:100; Invitrogen), rat alpha-mouse CD31 (1:50; BD Biosciences), rabbit alpha-mouse Ki67 (1:100; Abcam, Cambridge, MA, USA), rat alpha-mouse KERATIN8 (1:400; TROMA-I, Iowa City, IA, USA), rat alpha-mouse MECA32 (1:100; TROMA-I), rabbit alpha-human CSF1R (1:100; Abcam), goat alpha-human IBA1 (1:100; Abcam), rabbit alpha-TIMP3 (1:100; Abcam) and rabbit alpha-human p-CSF1R(Y723) (1:100 dilution with biotin-streptavidin amplification; Cell Signaling, Beverly, MA, USA). Alexa fluor 488 and 594 conjugated secondary donkey alpha-rat, goat alpha-mouse, or donkey alpha-rabbit antibodies (1:250; Invitrogen) were used for fluorescent detection. Images were acquired using a Nikon Eclipse E800 microscope equipped with a Photometrics Coolsnap camera. MetaVue software (Molecular Devices, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) was used for image acquisition. Confocal microscopy was done on an Olympus FV1000 Filter Confocal system. Immunohistochemical staining was imaged using a Nikon Eclipse 50i microscope equipped with an Axiocam HRC camera (Zeiss, Thornwood, NY, USA). All images were acquired at room temperature. Immunohistochemical data was quantified by calculating the area of antibody staining per unit area of tumor using FIJI software. NoneBlood vessel size was computed using the connected region plugin in the FIJI software. Western blot analysis was performed using lysates from transfected macrophages. The primary antibodies used were goat alpha-mouse SPRY1 (1:500; Santa Cruz, Dallas, TX, USA), rabbit alpha-human PDCD4 (1:1000; Abcam), rabbit anti-mouse ADAMTS5 (1:500; Santa Cruz) and goat alpha-mouse SPARC (1:500; R D systems, Minneapolis, MN, USA). HRP-linked secondary antibodies were employed. Use of human tissue was approved by the Ohio State University Institutional Review Board (IRB). In situ hybridization was performed using QuantiGene ViewRNA miRNA and mRNA probes (Panomics, Santa Clara, CA, USA). A protocol developed by the Solid Tumor Translational Core at the Ohio State University was used to perform double in situ hybridization forCsf1rmRNA and either miR-21 or miR-29a. Imaging was done on the Olympus FV1000 Filter Confocal system using a UPLFLN 40x oil objective (N.A. 1.3).Consecutive sections stained with a scrambled probe were utilized to set the background threshold for image acquisition. The Cy3 channel was employed to detect fluorescence miR-21 and miR-29a signal whereas the Cy5 channel was used to detectCsf1rmRNA hybridization signal. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays were performed on BMMs with 20ug of anti-ETS2 as described previously. None,NoneRabbit-IgG was used as a control (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA). Samples were analyzed by real-time PCR using the Roche Universal Probe Library (Roche Applied Science) and the Universal Master mix (Applied biosystems, Grand Island, NY, USA). RBCs were removed by osmotic lysis and viable white blood cells were stained with fluorophore conjugated antibodies for the markers of interest. Cells were sorted based on the co-expression of CD115 and CD45, and further analyzed for CD14 and CD16 positivity. The following antibodies were used: alpha-CD45(PE/Cy7)(BDPharmingen), alpha- CD115(PE), alpha-CD14(APC/Cy7) and alpha-CD16(AF700) (Biolegend, San Diego, CA, USA). RNA from CD115+CD16+ cells was used for miR real time PCR analysis. For mRNA targets of miRs, the Roche Universal Probe Library system was used. For miR-21 and -29a qRT-PCR, Taqman probes (Applied Biosystems) were utilized. U6 snRNA and snoRNA 202 were used as a housekeeping controls. The Applied Biosystems StepOne Plus instrument was used. Relative expression of the miRs compared to U6 snRNA or snoRNA202 was computed using a variation of the ddCt method. NoneMinitab, GraphPad and Excel were used for statistical analysis. For analysis of all data, an unpaired Student'sttest was used unless otherwise stated. All error bars depict SEM.