Direct C-H bond functionalization lies at the heart of modern organic chemistry and has attracted growing attention from synthetic chemists. NoneThe development of catalytic asymmetric systems for C-H functionalization will allow for the construction of optically active compounds directly from ubiquitous C-H bonds while installing various functionalities. Such a type of catalytic transformation is inherently challenging as it requires the catalyst to be sufficiently reactive to activate normally inert C-H bonds while demanding high controllability in order to achieve chemo-, regio- and stereoselectivity. Among different approaches, asymmetric C-H alkylationviametal-catalyzed carbene insertion represents one of the most effective methods for the enantioselective functionalization of C-H bonds (Scheme 1a). NoneA number of metal catalysts, including Rh2,None,None-None,NoneCu,None,None-NoneIr,Noneand FeNonecomplexes, have been successfully developed to catalyze enantioselective C-H alkylation with diazo reagents as the carbene sources. In fact, asymmetric C-H alkylationviacatalytic carbene insertion has already been applied as a key strategy for the enantioselective syntheses of natural products and pharmaceutically important molecules. None,None,None,None,NoneWhile the existing metal catalysts were shown to be highly effective with the use of acceptor- and donor/acceptor-substituted diazo reagents, acceptor/acceptor (A/A)-substituted diazo reagents, which bear two electron-withdrawing groups at the alpha-carbon, have proven to be highly challenging with respect to serving as carbene precursors for asymmetric C-H insertions. None-None,NoneThis challenge is closely related to the electronic nature of the existing Lewis acidic metal catalysts as well as the Fischer-type metallocarbene intermediates of these catalytic systems. Since the presence of the two electron-withdrawing groups results in significant decreases in the electron density at the alpha-carbon centers, A/A-substituted diazo reagents are generally less reactive toward Lewis acidic metal catalysts for carbene insertion processes. Once formed, the A/A-substituted metallocarbenes would be intrinsically too electrophilic to be controlled in subsequent C-H insertion steps, leading to poor regio- and enantioselectivities. Moreover, the high electrophilicity of the metallocarbenes would render a catalytic insertion system based on the use of A/A-substituted diazo reagents limited, with a substrate scope of only electron-rich C-H substrates and without the capability of functionalizing electron-deficient C-H bonds. Among previous efforts toward enantioselective C-H alkylation with A/A-substituted diazo reagents,Nonethe most notable example is the Cu-based intramolecular system recently reported by Maguire and coworkers. NoneSupported by chiral bisoxazoline ligands, this Cu-catalyzed asymmetric system was shown to enable intramolecular C-H insertion with alpha-alkoxycarbonyl-alpha-diazosulfones, affording the corresponding six-membered thiopyrans in high enantioselectivities. NoneHowever, the yields of the desired products were generally low to moderate (30-68%) as the Cu-catalyzed reactions typically gave a complex mixture of products. Furthermore, it was reported that the efficiency of the catalytic system was further reduced for C-H substrates with decreased electron richness. For example, the insertion reaction was completely inhibited for benzylic C-H bonds with an electron-withdrawing NO2group substituted at thepara-position of the phenyl ring. NoneEvidently, general and effective catalytic systems for asymmetric C-H alkylationviametal-mediated carbene insertion with A/A-substituted diazo reagents remain to be developed, despite extensive efforts undertaken. NoneBesides seeking further improvements on existing catalytic systems, exploration of fundamentally different pathways involving intermediates other than Fischer-type electrophilic metallocarbenes may provide new opportunities for addressing this and related challenges in asymmetric C-H alkylation. As stable low-spin 15e-metalloradicals, cobalt(ii) porphyrin complexes, [Co(Por)], have been disclosed to activate diazo reagents to form alpha-Co(iii)-alkyl radicals (also known as Co(iii)-carbene radicals), which serve as key intermediates in Co(ii)-based metalloradical catalysis (MRC). NoneUnlike the electrophilic Fischer-type carbene intermediates, alpha-Co(iii)-alkyl radicals have been demonstrated to undergo radical addition to alkenes and alkynes, followed by radical cyclization, leading to the development of catalytic radical cyclopropanation,None,NonecyclopropenationNoneand furanylation reactions. NoneConsidering the genuine radical nature of the metalloalkyl radical intermediates, we envisioned the possibility of a new C-H alkylation process (Scheme 1b) if (i) the alpha-Co(iii)-alkyl radical is capable of abstracting a C-H bond hydrogen atom and (ii) the subsequent radical substitution reaction between the resulting alkyl radical and Co(iii)-alkyl complex could proceed effectively. This type of metalloradical alkylation would be both fundamentally interesting and practically attractive as the radical pathway would be much less dependent on the electronic properties of the diazo reagents and C-H substrates, potentially leading to the development of a general catalytic system for C-H alkylation, including with A/A-substituted diazo reagents and for electron-deficient C-H bonds. Moreover, as another notable feature of radical reactions, this type of C-H functionalization would be expected to have a high degree of functional group tolerance. NoneAs the outcome of our efforts toward the development of radical-type C-H alkylation, we report herein the first Co(ii)-based metalloradical system that is highly effective for asymmetric intramolecular C-H alkylation with alpha-methoxycarbonyl-alpha-diazosulfones, a class of A/A-substituted diazo reagents. The new Co(ii)-catalyzed system can proceed at room temperature and is capable of alkylating C-H bonds with wide-ranging electronic properties, including challenging electron-deficient C-H bonds. In addition to high diastereo- and enantioselectivity, the metalloradical process features a remarkable degree of tolerance toward various functionalities, including unprotected OH and NH2groups, as well as excellent chemoselectivity for allylic/allenic C-H alkylation. Initial experiments were performed to examine the possibility of Co(ii)-based metalloradical catalysis for 1,5-C-H alkylation with alpha-methoxycarbonyl-alpha-diazosulfones1, a class of A/A-substituted diazo reagents that has not been previously demonstrated to undergo highly asymmetric C-H alkylation. NoneReaction screening started with a challenging C-H substrate with a 4-nitrophenyl group,1a(Table 1), which was shown to be ineffective for the Cu-based C-H insertion, presumably due to its electron-deficiency. NoneThe common [Co(TPP)] (TPP = 5,10,15,20-tetraphenylporphyrin) was shown to be incapable of activating1afor the expected C-H alkylation reaction, even when it was used in a stoichiometric amount (entry 1). We then turned our attention to the use of Co(ii) complexes ofD2-symmetric chiral amidoporphyrins [Co(D2-Por*)] as potential catalysts. NoneRemarkably, when [Co(P1)] (P1= 3,5-DiNoneBu-ChenPhyrin), a known metalloradical catalyst for radical cyclopropanation,None,Nonewas employed at only 2 mol% catalyst loading, effective intramolecular alkylation of the benzylic C-H bonds was observed even at room temperature, affording the desiredtrans-sulfolane2ain an 83% yield with a 90% dr, although with low enantioselectivity (entry 2). This dramatic ligand-accelerated catalysis is rationalized to be as a result of double N-H...O hydrogen bonding interactions between two of the amide N-H units on the ligand as donors and the SNoneO (SO2group) and CNoneO (CO2Me group) units of the substrate moiety as acceptors,None,None,Nonewhich may facilitate the activation of1athrough stabilization of the resulting alpha-Co(iii)-alkyl radicalA(Table 1). To improve enantioselectivity, a newD2-symmetric chiral amidoporphyrin, 3,5-DiNoneBu-(4'-NoneBu)XuPhyrin (P2), was modularly constructed from the chiral cyclopropanecarboxyamide containing two stereogenic centers (see ESINone). Under the same conditions, the Co(ii) complex of this second-generation catalyst [Co(P2)] (Table 1) was shown to catalyze the C-H alkylation reaction with significantly improved enantioselectivity and similarly high diastereoselectivity, but with a reduced product yield (entry 3). In an effort to increase the reaction yield without affecting its high stereoselectivities, replacement of 3,5-di-tert-butyl groups with 3,5-diisopropyl groups in two of themeso-positions ofP2, without changing the chiral building blocks, led to the design and synthesis of the less-hindered chiral porphyrin 3,5-DiiPr-(4'-NoneBu)XuPhyrin (P3) (see ESINone). The Co(ii) complex ofP3, [Co(P3)], was shown to efficiently catalyze the room temperature C-H alkylation of1a, producingtrans-sulfolane2ain 92% yield with 92% de and 92% ee (entry 4). NoneReactions were carried out at room temperature for 72 h in a one-time fashion without slow addition of the diazo reagent using [Co(Por)] under N2. NoneIsolated yields. NoneThe trans : cis diastereomeric ratio determined by1H-NMR. NoneEnantiomeric excess determined by chiral HPLC. NoneNo reaction. NoneFor clarity, the other twomeso-groups of the porphyrin are omitted. The [Co(P3)]-catalyzed intramolecular C-H alkylation was demonstrated to be applicable to A/A-substituted diazo reagents, alpha-methoxycarbonyl-alpha-diazosulfones1, containing different types of C-H bonds with varied electronic properties and substituents, leading to the stereoselective formation oftrans-sulfolane derivatives2(Table 2). In addition to1abearing the electron-withdrawing NO2group, diazo reagents1b-fwith various halogen substituents such as CF3, F, Cl, and Br could also be transformed by [Co(P3)] to the corresponding sulfolanes2b-fin high yields with high stereoselectivities (entries 1-6). As expected, alpha-diazosulfones with electron-neutral aryl units such as non-substituted phenyl (1g) andpara-methylphenyl groups (1h) were also suitable substrates for the Co(ii)-based system, providing the desired C-H alkylation products2gand2hin similarly high yields and stereoselectivities (entries 7 and 8). The relative and absolute configurations of the two contiguous chiral centers in2gwere established as [2S,3R] by X-ray crystal structural analysis (see ESINone). Likewise, electron-rich benzylic C-H bonds could also be effectively alkylated by the Co(ii)-based catalytic system, as demonstrated with the high-yielding and highly selective reactions of diazo reagents1iand1jcontaining electron-donating 4-alkoxyphenyl groups (entries 9 and 10). These results indicate that the Co(ii)-catalyzed asymmetric alkylation is insensitive to the electronics of the C-H substrates, which is in line with the envisioned radical mechanism (Scheme 1b). NoneSyntheses of catalysts and diazo compounds are summarized in ESI;Nonereactions were carried out at room temperature for 72 h using [Co(P3)] under N2; isolated yields; the trans : cis diastereomeric ratios were determined by1H-NMR; enantiomeric excesses were determined by chiral HPLC. None[2S,3R] absolute configuration determined by anomalous-dispersion effects in X-ray diffraction measurements on a crystal. None5 mol% catalyst used. NonePhF used as solvent. The [Co(P3)]-based catalytic system was further shown to display other attractive features that are unique for radical processes. Firstly, the metalloradical C-H alkylation was found to tolerate well various functional groups. For example, C-H substrates containing unprotected hydroxyl (1k) and amino (1l) groups as well as amido (1m) and triazole (1n) functionalities could undergo catalytic intramolecular alkylation reactions without affecting these usually reactive functional groups, providing highly functionalizedtrans-sulfolanes2k-nin excellent yields with high stereoselectivities (entries 11-14). Secondly, excellent chemoselectivity for intramolecular allylic C-H alkylation to form 5-membered sulfolanesversusCNoneC cyclopropanation to form bicyclo[4.1.0] structures was observed for this Co(ii)-based metalloradical catalysis. Allylic C-H substrates such as1oand1pwere chemoselectively alkylated to form sulfolanes2oand2pexclusively (entries 15 and 16), without any complications from the competitive cyclopropanations of the neighboring CNoneC bonds. NoneBesides allylic C-H bonds, chemoselective alkylation of allenic C-H bonds could also be achieved by [Co(P3)], as exemplified with substrate1q, affording the corresponding sulfolane2qin an excellent yield without any side reactions (entry 17). The remarkable chemoselectivity as well as functional group tolerance, together with the observed electronic insensitivity, highlight the unique features of this Co(ii)-based metalloradical alkylation system. NoneThe demonstrated reactivity and selectivity profile of the Co(ii)-catalyzed C-H alkylation is in good agreement with the anticipated radical pathway of metalloradical catalysis (MRC) (Scheme 1b). To directly probe the radical mechanism, we investigated potentialE-Zolefin isomerization of Co(ii)-catalyzed allylic C-H alkylation. Different from the concerted insertion pathway (Scheme 1a), the radical allylic alkylation would involve formation of allylic radical intermediates as a result of H-atom abstraction of allylic C-H bonds by the initial alpha-Co(iii)-alkyl radicals. In view of the facileE-Zinterconversion of allylic radicals,None,Nonethe catalytic reaction of isomerically pure allylic C-H substrates could lead to the formation of a mixture of (E)- and (Z)-alkylation products. To this end, alpha-methoxycarbonyl-alpha-diazosulfones1rand1s, which were derived from the (E)- and (Z)-isomers of 2-hexene, respectively, were employed as radical probe substrates for Co(ii)-based metalloradical alkylation. As expected,E-Zisomerization was observed in the alkylation reactions of both1rand1s, producing isomeric mixtures of products2rand2sin high combined yields (Table 3). Interestingly, the degree of the isomerization could be controlled by Co(ii) catalysts with different ligand environments. With use of the sterically encumbered [Co(P3)] catalyst, both1rand1stended to mostly retain their olefin configuration with only slight isomerization observed (entries 1 and 4). When the less sterically hindered [Co(P4)] (P4= 3,5-DiNoneBu-IbuPhyrin) was used as the catalyst, an increase in the degree of isomerization was observed for both alkylation reactions (entries 2 and 5). These results indicate that the degree of isomerization of the allylic radicals is kinetically controlled by the ligand sterics. Accordingly, by using even less sterically hindered [Co(P5)] (P5=meso-NoneBu-IbuPhyrin) as the catalyst, further increases in isomerization were observed in both reactions (entries 3 and 6). In fact, [Co(P5)]-catalyzed alkylation reactions of both1rand1sgenerated mixtures of2rand2swith similar ratios (entries 3 and 6), suggesting near equilibrium distributions of the two isomeric products. The results from these isomerization experiments provide further support of the proposed radical mechanism for the Co(ii)-catalyzed alkylation. NoneReactions were carried out in benzene with 2 mol % catalyst at 40 degrees C for 72 h under N2. NoneIsolated yields. NoneTheE-Zratio determined by1H-NMR. The Co(ii)-catalyzed asymmetric C-H alkylation allowed for stereoselective construction of 5-membered sulfolane structures with concurrent creation of two contiguous stereogenic centers. By taking advantage of the acidity of the chiral methine unit between the two electron-withdrawing groups, sulfolanes2could be further transformed to produce more densely functionalized derivatives3(Table 4), which may find interesting biomedical applications. NoneFor example, enantioenriched sulfolanes2iand2ecould be selectively fluorinated with selectfluor after facile deprotonation of the acidic chiral center, affording compounds3iaand3ea, respectively, in high yields with excellent diastereoselectivities and without affecting the original enantiopurities (entries 1 and 2). The absolute configuration of the two contiguous stereocenters in3ea, including the newly-created quaternary chiral center, was established as [2R,3R] by X-ray crystal structural analysis (see ESINone). Highly stereoselective chlorination and methylation could be similarly achieved as demonstrated with the high-yielding production of compounds3ib(entry 3) and3ic(entry 4), respectively, from2i. Besides nucleophilic substitution reactions, the resulting carbanion from the acidic chiral center in2could also be employed for Michael addition as exemplified by the reaction of2iwith ethyl acrylate, affording multi-functional sulfolane3idwhile retaining the original optical purity (entry 5). NoneCompound2was treated with 1.2 equiv. of NaH in THF at room temperature, followed by the addition of 1.1 equiv. of electrophile and the subsequent stirring of the reaction mixture for 12 h; isolated yields; the trans : cis diastereomeric ratios were determined by1H-NMR; enantiomeric excesses were determined by chiral HPLC. NoneTHF/DMF (2 : 1) used as solvent. None[2R,3R] absolute configuration determined by anomalous-dispersion effects in X-ray diffraction measurements on a crystal. NoneThe reaction was stirred for 3 h.In summary, we have demonstrated a fundamentally new approach based on the concept of metalloradical catalysis (MRC) for addressing asymmetric C-H alkylation with challenging acceptor/acceptor-substituted diazo reagents, such as alpha-methoxycarbonyl-alpha-diazosulfones. With the development of the newD2-symmetric chiral amidoporphyrin 3,5-DiiPr-(4'-tBu)XuPhyrin (P3) as the supporting ligand, we have shown that its Co(ii) complex [Co(P3)] is an effective metalloradical catalyst for asymmetric intramolecular 1,5-C-H alkylation of alpha-methoxycarbonyl-alpha-diazosulfones, producing 5-membered sulfolane derivatives in high yields with excellent stereoselectivities. In addition to its room temperature operation, the Co(ii)-based metalloradical alkylation system demonstrates several salient features, such as unusual insensitivity to the electronics of C-H substrates, excellent chemoselectivity toward allylic/allenic C-H bonds, and outstanding tolerance to functional groups. Our preliminary results suggest that the unique reactivity and selectivity profile of the Co(ii)-catalyzed C-H alkylation likely originates from the underlying radical mechanism. Efforts are underway to expand the application of Co(ii)-MRC for asymmetric C-H alkylation as well as to further its mechanistic understanding.