Neuroblastoma (NB) is a malignant tumor that derives from the neural crest and is responsible for 13% of cancer related deaths in children (1). Although the underlying molecular causes for NB development remains unresolved, a number of molecular changes are associated with tumor progression and disease prognosis including amplification and overexpression of the MYCN oncogene, increased activation of receptor tyrosine kinases such as ALK and TRKB, chromosome deletion, oncogene activation and tumor suppressor loss [reviewed in (2)]. The phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) family of lipid kinases has been identified as a potential target for NB tumor treatment (3,4). Inhibition of PI3Ks by pan-inhibitors block malignant progressionin vivo(3); however, these inhibitors blocks all PI3Ks causing serious toxic effects, thereby limiting their promise for use in NB treatment. The role of PI3Ks in NB tumorigenesis has been associated with their ability to stabilize the MYCN oncogenic transcription factor that is amplified in 25% of NB patients (5). Emerging data implicate different PI3K isoforms in neuroblastomas through stabilization of MYCN oncoprotein (3,6,7). PI3Ks represent a family of lipid kinases that phosphorylate the 3' position of phosphatidylinositol. This family consists of three distinct classes based on sequence homology. Class I PI3Ks have garnered significant attention due to the presence of specific activating mutations in human cancers resulting in the effort to develop specific Class 1A isoform-specific inhibitors as therapeutics (8). The role of Class II PI3Ks in human cancers is less clear due to the lack of identified mutations in this family of enzymes. However, PI3K Class IIbeta (PI3K-C2beta) expression is upregulated in a number of cancers (9-11) and overexpression of PI3K-C2beta leads toin vitrotransformation of colonic epithelia cells (12). Furthermore, PI3K-C2beta regulates cell survival signaling both in adherent cells (13,14) and in suspension (15) which may aid in the survival of metastatic cells once they migrate from the primary tumor site. Intersectin 1 (ITSN1) is a multi-domain scaffold protein encoded by two major splice products. Both ITSN1-short (ITSN1-S) and ITSN1-long (ITSN1-L) possess two NH2-terminal Eps15 homology (EH) domains followed by a coiled-coil (CC) domain and five Src homology 3 (SH3) domains. These domains allow ITSN1 to interact with a multitude of partners to regulate endocytosis as well as a variety of signal transduction pathways [reviewed in (16)]. ITSN1-L possesses an extended COOH-terminus encoding a guanine nucleotide exchange factor domain specific for Cdc42, a member of the Rho subfamily of Ras-like GTP-ases (17,18). ITSN-L is specifically expressed in neurons whereas ITSN1-S is more widely expressed in multiple cell types. Overexpression of ITSN1 promotes transformation of rodent fibroblasts suggesting that this scaffold may play a role in cancer development (19,20). Furthermore, ITSN1 regulates the compartmentalized activation of the Ras protooncogene further supporting a potential role for this scaffold in human tumorigenesis (21). We discovered that ITSN1 interacts with PI3K-C2beta and regulates its activation in the N1E-115 mouse NB cell line (13). However, the role of this ITSN1-PI3K-C2beta pathway in cancer has not been explored. We previously demonstrated that ITSN1 silencing reduced survival of N1E-115 cells during differentiation and that overexpression of PI3K-C2beta or AKT was sufficient to rescue survival of these ITSN1-silenced cells suggesting that the ITSN1-PI3K-C2beta pathway plays an important role in cell survival during differentiation (13). However, the involvement of ITSN1 in NB tumorigenesis was not explored. Given ITSN's ability to induce transformation of rodent fibroblasts, we have examined whether the ITSN1-PI3K-C2beta pathway regulates the tumorigenic properties of human NBs. Herein, we demonstrate that ITSN1-S and PI3K-C2beta are expressed in primary human NB tumors as well as NB tumor cell lines and that silencing of ITSN1 in NB cell lines reduces their anchorage independent growthin vitroas well as tumor growth in a xenograft modelin vivo. Finally, we demonstrate that overexpression of PI3K-C2beta rescues the soft agar growth of ITSN1-silenced NB cells suggesting that PI3K-C2beta functions downstream of ITSN1 to regulate the tumorigenic properties of NB cells. ITSN1 regulates survival during differentiation of mouse N1E-115 NB line through activation of PI3K-C2beta (13). Although ITSN1 is expressed as both a long and short isoform (ITSN1-L and ITSN1-S, respectively) with the long isoform predominant in neurons (16,22), ITSN1-S is sufficient to regulate this survival pathway in N1E-115 cells. Furthermore, ITSN1-S activates the Ras proto-oncogene in a compartmentalized specific manner (21). Given the importance of Ras in oncogenic transformation coupled with ITSN1's transforming activity in rodent fibroblastsin vitro(19,20), we sought to examine whether ITSN1 might also play an important biological role in human NB tumors. Western blot analysis of human NB lines revealed significant expression of ITSN1-S in both MYCN-amplified (MYCN+; includes NLF, LAN-1, IMR-5, CHP-134) and non-amplified (MYCN-; includes NB-69, SH-SY5Y, SK-N-AS) cells (Fig. 1). Although ITSN1-S is the predominant isoform expressed in this panel of NB cells, ITSN1-L is expressed at significant levels in LAN2, LAN5, and IMR-32 cells (data not shown). Analysis of PI3K isoform expression revealed high levels of PI3K-C2beta whereas the well-studied PI3K-C1alpha (p110) isoform was expressed at more varied levels (Fig. 1A). Since NB lines are invariably derived from high-grade tumors, we examined the expression of ITSN1 and PI3K-C2beta in primary human NB tumor samples of differing clinical stages (Fig. 1B). Ten of the eleven tumors expressed levels of ITSN1-S equivalent to or higher than levels observed in CHP-134 NB cell line. The acute promyelocytic leukemia cell line HL-60 does not express ITSN1 and was included as a negative control for comparison. Given ITSN1's expression in NB cells coupled with its transforming activity in rodent fibroblasts (19,20), we examined the effect of ITSN1 silencing on the tumorigenic properties of both MYCN+ and MYCN- human NBs. Western blot analysis of polyclonal populations both CHP-134 (MYCN+) and SK-N-AS (MYCN-) lines stably infected with retrovirus encoding specific shRNAs revealed that two independent ITSN1-specific shRNAs (sh#1 and sh#2) reduced ITSN1 expression by greater than 90% compared to control cell lines infected with virus generated from empty vector (pSR) or expressing a scrambled shRNA (pSCR) (Fig. 2A). Similar results were obtained with two additional NB lines, IMR-5 (MYCN+) and NLF (MYCN+) (Fig. S1A). ITSN1 silencing did not affect the proliferation or viability of these NB cells compared to controls (Fig. 2BandS1B). Although silencing ITSN1 in neurons and endothelial cells results in increased apoptosis (13,23), we did not observe any increase in apoptosis ITSN1-silenced NB cell lines grown under anchorage-independent conditions (Fig. S1C). We next assessed whether ITSN1-silencing altered the anchorage-independent growth of the NB lines in soft agar assays. Strikingly, ITSN1-silencing reduced the anchorage-independent growth of NBs by greater than 70% compared to control lines in three of the four lines examined (Fig. 3A BandS2A B). Furthermore, overexpression of ITSN1-S in parental NB cells enhanced soft agar growth by 2.5-fold compared to control cells (Fig. 3C-E). These data reveal that ITSN1 is an important component in the anchorage-independent growth of NB cells. One function of ITSN1 is to regulate the process of endocytosis (24,25). Given the link between endocytosis and oncogenesis (26,27), we next tested whether the inhibition of soft agar growth of ITSN1-silenced NB cells was due to defects in endocytosis. Similar to our previous results in N1E-115 cells (13), ITSN1 depletion in human NBs did not alter transferrin internalization (Fig. 4). Based on the soft agar data, we next assessed whether ITSN1 was important for tumorigenic properties of NB cellsin vivo. Although control lines (pSR and pSCR) for CHP-134, SK-N-AS, and IMR-5 readily formed tumors in a xenograft model, ITSN1-silenced subclones (sh#1 and sh#2) were significantly impaired in tumor growth (Figs. 5andS3). However, ITSN1-silencing did not significantly impact the tumor growth of NLF cells (Fig. S3). To determine whether ITSN1 may become re-expressed in tumors that emerged in mice injected with ITSN1-silenced cells, we analyzed lysates of tumors from mice injected with the IMR-5 derived cells (Fig. S4). Interestingly, those tumors that emerged from injection of ITSN1-silenced cells appear to re-express ITSN1. These observations further support the notion that ITSN1 is indeed necessary for tumor growthin vivo. There did not appear to be any consistent changes in PI3K-C2beta levels. In sum, ITSN1 silencing reduced the tumorigenic growth of 3 out of 4 human NB cell lines strongly suggesting that ITSN1 is important for the tumorigenic potential of NB cells. PI3K-C2beta binds ITSN1 and mediates survival elicited by ITSN1 during neuronal differentiation (13). Thus, we tested whether PI3K-C2beta might also mediate ITSN1's role in human NB tumorigenesis. CFP-tagged PI3K-C2beta was stably overexpressed in ITSN1-silenced cells (Fig. 6A) and the resulting stable cell line used in a soft agar assay to assess effects on anchorage-independent growth. Interestingly, CFP-PI3K-C2beta overexpression rescued anchorage-independent growth of ITSN1-depleted NB cells (Fig. 6B). Consistent with the ITSN1 silencing results, overexpression of PI3K-C2beta did not alter growth of adherent cells (Fig.6C). ITSN1 is highly expressed in the central nervous system with neurons expressing mainly ITSN1-L and little to no ITSN1-S. Interestingly, neuroblastoma tumors present the opposite pattern of expression where ITSN1-S predominates with ITSN1-L at much reduced levels. However, several of the tumors do express ITSN1-L with at least one of these tumors expressing similar levels of both isoforms (Fig. 1B). Given the ability of ITSN1 to induce oncogenic transformation (19,20), these findings suggest that ITSN1 may play a role in NB tumorigenesis. Although oncogenic mutations have not been described for ITSN1, examination of gene expression databases reveals a potential involvement of ITSN1 in several cancers. The ONCOMINETM database indicates that ITSN1 message is overexpressed in pancreatic, lung, liposarcomas, and Wilm's tumor. Several public databases available through the Oncogenomic website (http://pob.abcc.ncifcrf.gov/cgi-bin/JK) indicate that ITSN1 message is overexpressed in NBs and that ITSN1 expression (either ITSN-S or ITSN-L) predicts for poor prognosis in high risk NB patients (28,29). Indeed, our study demonstrates for the first time that ITSN1-S is required for anchorage-independent growth of NBs bothin vitroin soft agar assays as well asin vivoin xenograft assays. Furthermore, recent reports demonstrate an important role for ITSN1 in thein vivotumor growth of gliomas (30,31). These findings coupled with our results suggest that ITSN1 may play a more general role in human tumorigenesis. Interestingly, neither ITSN1 silencing nor PI3K-C2beta overexpression affects the growth of adherent cells or survival of cells in suspension indicating that the ITSN1-PI3K-C2beta pathway may specifically regulate growth of tumor cells in suspension. These observations suggest that ITSN1 may be involved in the process of tumor colonization of distant organs. Somatic mutations in Class 1 PI3K (PIK3CA) are found in a number of cancers while mutations in the remaining seven PI3K isoforms have not been identified thus far [reviewed in (32)]. PI3K-C2beta overexpression, however, rescues anchorage-independent growth of ITSN1-depleted cells suggesting that PI3K-C2beta may mediate ITSN1's role in tumorigenesis. Indeed, several lines of evidence suggest a role for PI3K-C2beta in cancer. Single nucleotide polymorphisms in the promoter region of PI3K-C2beta are associated with increased risk for prostate cancer suggesting enhanced expression of the protein in these cancers (33). Overexpression of PI3K-C2beta in colonic epithelial cells results in oncogenic transformation (12). Furthermore, several microarray studies suggest that PI3K-C2beta is upregulated in a variety of cancers including mixed lineage leukemias (MLL) (11), a subset of acute myeloid leukemias (9), and pancreatic cancers (10). As noted earlier, ITSN1 has also been reported to be overexpressed in pancreatic cancers suggesting that upregulation of the ITSN1-PI3K-C2beta signaling pathway may play an important role in pancreatic cancers as well. Although both ITSN1-S and ITSN1-L are expressed in primary NB tumors and NB cell lines, ITSN1-S is the predominant isoform in these samples. The reason for this difference in expression of the two isoforms is not clear. ITSN1-L possesses all the domains present in ITSN1-S in addition to an extended COOH-terminus encoding a GEF specific for Cdc42 resulting in unique functions for ITSN1-L vs ITSN1-S. Indeed, ITSN1-L is important in regulation of exocytosis through activation of Cdc42 (22,34,35). However, it is not clear that ITSN1-L possesses all the same activities as ITSN1-S [reviewed in (16)]. For example, the SH3 domains of ITSN1-L make contacts with the DH-PH region suggesting that these interaction may result in steric constraints that interfere with the SH3 domains binding to specific targets. We have not been successful in stably overexpressing ITSN1-L in human NB cells suggesting that elevated levels of ITSN1-L are not compatible with the growth of these cells. Given that ITSN1-L is highly expressed in neurons and poorly expressed in NBs, ITSN1-L may be more important for regulating neuronal differentiation versus oncogenic transformation. ITSN1's role in NB tumorigenesis is linked to its ability to regulate signaling rather than due to its role in endocytosis. Although ITSN1 regulates clathrin- and caveolin-dependent internalization [reviewed in (16)], stable silencing of ITSN1 did not affect transferrin uptake consistent with previous findings (13). Furthermore, overexpression of PI3K-C2beta was sufficient to rescue anchorage-independent growth of ITSN1-silenced IMR-5 cells suggesting that the defect in tumor formation by ITSN1-silenced cells is due impairment in the PI3K-C2beta signaling pathway. Indeed, PI3K activation in NBs enhances PKB/AKT activation leading to the stabilization of MYCN levels as a result of decreased GSK-3beta phosphorylation of MYCN which leads to degradation of the oncoprotein (3). ITSN1 depletion results in reduced basal phosphorylation of AKT in neurons and in NB cells (13)(data not shown) suggesting a defect in PI3K pathway activation in these cells. ITSN1 also regulates the compartmentalized activation of Ras (21); however, the effects of ITSN1-Ras activation in human NB is not known. Finally, a number of RTKs such as TrkB and Alk play important roles in NB tumorigenesis (36-40). ITSN1 regulates RTK trafficking and PI3K-C2beta associates with multiple RTKs (41,42). Thus, future studies on the role of ITSN1-PI3K-C2beta in RTK signaling in NBs may reveal new signaling pathways important for NB tumorigenesis. In conclusion, our findings reveal a novel role for both ITSN1 and PI3K-C2beta in NB tumorigenesis providing new insight in the molecular signaling pathways underlying NB tumorigenesis. The polyclonal rabbit anti-ITSN1 antibody has been previously described (42). Monoclonal antibody against human PI3K-C2beta was purchased from BD Transduction Laboratories. Antibody to the p110 subunit of Class 1 PI3K (PI3K-C1alpha) was purchased from Cell Signaling Technologies. Antibody to beta-actin were purchased from Sigma. All NB cell lines used in this study were maintained in RPMI with 10% fetal bovine serum at 37 degrees C in 5% CO2. and were the kind gifts of Drs. Bernard Weissman (University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill) and Naohiko Ikegaki (University of Illinois at Chicago). Puromycin (GIBCO) was used at 1mug/ml and G418 (GIBCO) was used at 200 mug/ml. Phoenix-GP cells were kindly provided by Dr. Gary Nolan (Stanford University). These packaging cell were transiently transfected using calcium phosphate method with 20 mug of vector alone (pSUPER.retro.puro; pSR) or pSR expressing shRNAs to ITSN1 (sh#1 or sh#2) along with a plasmid encoding the VSV-G envelope to generate viral particles. On the following day, the media was replaced with fresh media, and NB cells seeded for infection. On day 2 post-transfection, conditioned media from the Phoenix-GP cells was collected, filtered, and used to infect NB cells followed by selection in puromycin. Following selection, colonies were pooled to generate a polyclonal cell line which was used for all subsequent analyses. Western Blot analyses of polyclonal cell lines were performed as previously described (19). The sequences of oligonucleotides use to construct these vectors are as follows: sh#1A: 5'-gatccccggatatcagctaccctc tgcacttccttcaagagaggaagtgcagagggta gctgatatccttttt-3' and sh#1B 5'-TCGATTTTTCCTATAGTCGATGGGAGACGTGAAGGAGAGAACTTCCTTCACGTCT CCCATCGACTATAGGCCC-3'; sh#2A 5'-gatccccgaaggcaagaactacta aatcaaagattcaagagatctttgatttagtagttcttgccttcttttt-3' and sh#2B 5'-AAAAAGAAGGCAAGAACTACTAAATCAAAGATCTCTTG AATCTTTGATTTAGTAGTTCTTGCCTTCGGGGATC-3'; pSCR-A-5'-gatccccgg tactaaagcgaatattattcaagagataatattcgctttagtaccttttt and pSCR-B 5'-AAAAAGGTACTAAAGCGAATATTATCTCTTGAATAATATTCG CTTTAGTACCGGGGATC. NB cells (700 per well) were plated on 24-well plates in complete media (RPMI +10%FBS plus puromycin) for the indicated number of days. On the indicated day, media was removed and replaced with 100mul of complete media to which 100mul of CellTiter Glow (Promega) was added to the cells. Luminescence was quantified on a Dynex 96-well microtiter plate luminometer according to the manufacture's instructions. Assays were performed essentially as described (43). Briefly, 5% (w/v) agar (DIFCO, Detroit MI) was prepared in distilled water then diluted to 0.5% final concentration with complete media and kept @ 60 degrees C in water bath. A bottom layer of 0.5% agar was plated in each well of six-well plates to which cells were subsequently plated in a top layer of 0.37% agar cooled at 37 degrees C. Samples were placed in humidified cell culture incubators at 37 degrees C for 2-3 weeks after which colonies were stained using 100 mul solution of (3-(4,5- dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT; 2 mg/ml in H2O). Cells (2*105per well) were plated in 6-well plates. The following the day, cells were equilibrated in the presence of 2% BSA for 1h @ 37 degrees C then incubated in the presence of Biotinylated transferrin for 15 min @ 37 degrees C. Cells were washed with ice cold PBS, followed by an acid washed (0.2M NaCl/0.2M acetic acid) on ice for 8 min then lysed and analyzed by Western blot using horseradish peroxidase linked to streptavidin as previously described (13). Cells were seeded on Ultra-Low attachment plates (Corning) at a density of 0.5* 106cells per well. After 24 hrs, cells were collected, washed once with PBS and trypsinized (0.25%) for 10 min @ 37 degrees C, washed again with PBS, centrifuged and resuspended in 1* Binding Buffer at a concentration of 1*106cells/ml. 100 mul of the cell suspension (1*105cells) were transferred into a 5 ml culture tube. 5 mul of FITC-conjugated-Annexin V and/or 1 mul of PI were added to the cells. The cells were then incubated for 15 min at RT (25 degrees C) in the dark followed by addition of 400 mul of 1* binding buffer to each tube. Apoptosis was then quantified by flow cytometry within one hour. Approximately 10*106cells for each stable NB line were collected in resuspended in Matrigel (BD bioscience) at a 1:1 volume ratio in a total volume of 200 mul. This cell-Matrigel mixture was kept on ice then injected subcutaneously into the mouse flanks using a 25G syringe. Tumor growth was monitored by caliper every other day for 4 weeks or until the tumors reached a diameter of 1 cm. Tumor volume was calculated using the formula (d1* d2* d3) * pi/6. Animals were then sacrificed and tumors extracted. Figure S1. A) IMR-5 and NLF cells stably infected with pSR or pSR-sh#1 were lysed and analyzed by Western blot to assess ITSN1 expression. B) Growth curves of IMR-5 and NLF lines. Each point is the average of three independent wells of cells +/- standard deviation. C) ITSN1 silencing does not increase apoptosis in cells grown in suspension. Annexin V levels were measured by flow cytometry in control, vector infected (pSR) or ITSN1-silenced (sh#1) polyclonal lines from both SK-N-AS and IMR-5 NB lines. Results are the average +/- standard deviation of three experiments for SK-N-AS and two experiments for IMR-5. Cells were analyzed after one day of growth in suspension. Figure S2. A) IMR-5 and NLF cells stably infected with pSR or pSR-sh#1 were plated in triplicate in soft agar and colonies stained with MTT after 3 weeks of growth. B) Quantification of soft agar assays. Assays were quantified as inFig. 3. This experiment was repeated under different conditions and gave the same result. Figure S3. A) IMR-5 and NLF cells stably infected with pSR or pSR-sh#1 were injected in the flanks of nude mice (8 injections per line). Tumors volumes were calculated and plotted as inFig. 5. B) Tumor volumes were plotted over time for 20 days following injection. Figure S4. Western blot of ITSN1 and PI3K-C2beta expression in nude mouse tumors. Lysates of nude mouse tumors derived from injection of IMR-5 cell lines were analyzed by Western blot for expression of ITSN1 and PI3K-C2beta. beta-actin was used as loading control.