These Tables list key protein targets and ligands in this article which are hyperlinked to corresponding entries inhttp://www.guidetopharmacology.org, the common portal for data from the IUPHAR/BPS Guide to PHARMACOLOGY (Pawsonet al.,2014) and are permanently archived in the Concise Guide to PHARMACOLOGY 2013/14 (NoneAlexanderet al., 2013a,b,c,d,eNone,None,None,None,None). The four isoforms of p38 are structurally homologous. The alpha and beta isoforms share 74% sequence identity while the gamma and delta isoforms are ?70% similar to each other and ?60% homologous to the alpha isoform. Significantly, the isoforms have different sensitivities to p38 inhibitors such as SB203580 (Eyerset al.,1998). These inhibitors compete with ATP and tend to inhibit p38alpha and p38beta, over the p38gamma and p38delta isoforms, because of small differences in side-chain length of their gatekeeper residues (Eyerset al.,1998). This feature can be used to create inhibitor resistant p38alpha and p38beta knock-in mouse lines (O'Keefeet al.,2007). This strategy implicated p38alpha in both lethal myocardial ischaemic injury and cardioprotection following preconditioning (Kumphuneet al.,2010; Sicardet al.,2010). Similarly, the p38alpha knockout mouse dies at embryonal day 10.5-11.5 (Adamset al.,2000; Allenet al.,2000) while ablation of the other isoforms, individually or p38delta and p38gamma in combination, results in live mice without major abnormalities (Beardmoreet al.,2005; Sabioet al.,2005). In addition, the loss of one isoform does not alter the expression or activity of the other isoforms. While p38alpha and p38beta are ubiquitously expressed, the other isoforms possess a tissue-specific expression pattern, perhaps indicative of their different roles. p38gamma has been implicated in myoblast differentiation and is enriched in skeletal muscle (Lechneret al.,1996). p38delta is predominantly expressed in lungs, kidney, testis, spleen, pancreas and small intestine (Kumaret al.,1997). The subcellular distribution of the isoforms may also indicate divergent roles, as p38alpha and p38beta can be found in the cytosol and the nucleus while p38gamma isoform is nuclear located in response to chronic pressure overload (Dingaret al.,2010). This theme can be further elaborated on by the substrates identified to be phosphorylated by the different isoforms. While most substrates such as myelin basic protein and activating transcription factor 2 are phosphorylated by multiple isoforms, some substrates appear to be uniquely phosphorylated by a particular isoform. The MAPK activated PK 2 (MAPKAPK2) has been showin vitroto be phosphorylated by alpha and beta isoforms only (Cuendaet al.,1997). Identification of the repertoire of substrates of gamma and delta has been more challenging because of the lack of a specific inhibitor for these isoforms. p38gamma is unique in possessing a PDZ-binding domain sequence, KETXL, at its C-terminus likely responsible for the observed substrate bias towards alpha1 syntrophin, synapse-associated protein 90/ postsynaptic density 95 (Hasegawaet al.,1999; Sabioet al.,2004) and synapse-associated protein 97 (Sabioet al.,2005). The delta isoform has been shown to phosphorylate stathmin and Tauauin vitro(Parkeret al.,1998; Yoshida and Goedert,2006) indicating the isoform is involved in regulating microtubule dynamics. All four isoforms have been detected in the murine heart, but with higher levels of expression for p38alpha and p38gamma compared with p38beta and p38delta (Dingaret al.,2010). While the relationship between the isoforms is clearly complex and is still being elucidated, p38alpha appears most relevant to cardiovascular biology. The structure of p38alpha is similar to that of other kinases with a smaller N-terminal lobe mainly composed of beta-pleated sheets and a C-terminal lobe of alpha helices. The ATP-binding pocket/catalytic cleft is located at the juncture of these two lobes. In addition, an activation loop, with a number of conserved motifs, lies adjacent to the ATP-binding pocket. The activity of p38 is indicated by the dual phosphorylation of the TGY motif in the activation loop of the kinase (Taylor and Kornev,2011). Upstream kinases, termed MAPK kinases (MKK), such as MKK3, MKK6, phosphorylate these residues (Figure 1) (Derijardet al.,1995; Raingeaudet al.,1996). The specific activator of the p38 isoform depends on the stimulus and the cell type (Remyet al.,2010). In turn, the MKKs are phosphorylated by upstream MAPK kinase kinases such as the TGF-beta activated PK (TAK1). This hierarchical three-tiered level of activation is termed the canonical activation pathway. These components mediate the transduction of an environmental stress signal to elicit a response by the cell. The major pathways of p38 activation. In the canonical activation pathway, TAK1 undergoes autophophorylation (grey arrow) upon binding to TAB1 (left portion of figure). This activated kinase in turn activates MKK3 or MKK6 by a transphosphorylation reaction (black arrow). Subsequently, the activated MKK phosphorylates p38alpha. p38alpha can also be activated by a more direct TAB1-mediated mechanism (right portion of figure). Binding of TAB1 to p38alpha induces autophosphorylation of p38alpha and activation of the kinase. TAB1 is also a substrate of p38alpha and phosphorylated TAB1 is a negative regulator of TAK1 autophosphorylation. The conformation of the non-active kinase differs from that of the active kinase. In the inactive kinase, the activation loop occupies and sterically blocks the peptide-binding channel. The two lobes of the kinase are misaligned and therefore two residues, Lys53of the N-terminal lobe and Asp168of the C-terminal lobe, are not in close proximity. An active kinase requires cooperation between these key residues to bind the alpha phosphate group and ribose group of ATP and the companion Mg2+ions (Wilsonet al.,1996; Gumet al.,1998). Activation of the kinase via phosphorylation occurs in a highly ordered mechanism and results in the movement of the activation loop away from the peptide-binding channel (Humphreyset al.,2013). It is thought this movement exerts a 'crank-handle effect' on the tertiary structure of the kinase inducing the movement of the two lobes resulting in the alignment of Lys53and Asp168facilitating ATP binding. Overall these conformational changes result in the formation of the catalytic 'hydrophobic spine' of the kinase (Taylor and Kornev,2011). In summary, the transphosphorylation of the TGY motif of the activation loop of the kinase, by upstream kinases, results in significant rearrangement of the kinase and dramatically increases its ability to function. Therefore, the activation of the kinase is a critical factor in the ability of a kinase to phosphorylate its substrates. In addition to the canonical activation pathway, other additional activation mechanisms of p38 have been identified. Several groups, including ours, have reported a profound effect of binding of p38alpha isoform to the scaffold protein TAK1 binding protein 1 (TAB1) (Figure 1) (Geet al.,2002; Tannoet al.,2003; Liet al.,2005). This binding results in activation of the kinase independent of upstream kinases through autophosphorylation. The binding of TAB1 to p38 resulted in significant alterations in the conformation of the kinase to facilitate active intramolecular phosphotransfer (De Nicolaet al.,2013). This has been observed with the alpha isoform only (De Nicolaet al.,2013). Interestingly, this scaffold-induced mode of activation was shown to be the mechanism through which p38 is activated during myocardial ischaemia (Kumphuneet al.,2010). This indicates a significantly different mechanism than the more usual transactivation by MKK3/6 upstream kinases and may only occur under a limited number of circumstances. There are numerous lines of evidence indicating the importance of p38 in biology. TheSaccharomyces cerevisiaehomologue of p38alpha is the pheromone and stress-sensingHog1gene (Bellet al.,2001). The high-osmolarity glycerol pathway has numerous functions in yeast including modulation of cell cycle progression at several stages and regulation of the biogenesis and export of mRNAs of stress-responsive genes (Duchet al.,2012; Regotet al.,2013). Similar to the mammalian system,Hog1is a component in a hierarchical activation cascade and is activated by phosphorylation of its activation loop motif by the upstream kinases, Pbs2 (Brewsteret al.,1993). Another conserved feature is the mode of activation through autophosphorylation, in this case by binding to the scaffold protein, Ste5 (Bhattacharyyaet al.,2006). The evolutionary conservation of the protein and its mechanisms of activation highlight its biological importance. In addition, the ubiquitous expression of the alpha isoform and studies indicating this is the predominant isoform mediating the harmful effects during myocardial infarction and the beneficial effects of preconditioning further underline its central function. This is further reflected in the significant interest in p38 MAPK attested by the high number (approaching 25 000) of papers returned on a PubMed search. Designing a specific p38 kinase inhibitor has proven to be challenging for a number of reasons. The 500 known mammalian PKs share a highly homologous ATP-binding site. Therefore, finding unique target areas for enabling the design of selective inhibitors has been difficult. For this reason, many kinase inhibitors have been shown to inhibit multiple kinase in addition to the original target (Bainet al.,2003). Nevertheless, the prominent role of p38alpha in cytokine production resulted in early success with inhibitors for use in arthritis, inflammatory bowel disease and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (Leeet al.,1994). A number of crystal structures of p38alpha and p38gamma in the presence or absence of a bound inhibitor are available in the protein databases and they provide a resource for future inhibitor design (Wilsonet al.,1996; Wanget al.,1997; Bellonet al.,1999; Changet al.,2002). The type I inhibitors binds in an ATP competitive manner. As discussed previously, the gatekeeper residue is a key determinant in the binding of the inhibitor and therefore the different isoforms have varied sensitivities to these types of inhibitors (Wilsonet al.,1996; Gumet al.,1998). Members of this class also include SB 203580 and losmapimod. A challenge for efficient inhibition with type I inhibitors is that they must compete with physiological concentrations of ATP. To overcome these challenges, second types of inhibitors, which bind to the ATP-binding site and an adjacent region have been designed. Members of these type II inhibitors include BIRB 796 and VX745. BIRB 796 has been shown to inhibit all isoforms of the kinase (Kumaet al.,2005). These inhibitors make use of a pocket vacated by the DFG motif, which lies in the N-terminal portion of the activation loop. When the side chains of Asp and Phe are in the 'out' position, the kinase is inactive. BIRB796 binds to the 'DFG out' stabilizing it and preventing the kinase changing to an active conformation (Pargelliset al.,2002; Kumaet al.,2005). BIRB796 displays a slow onset of action as the DFG out conformer is rare. Despite the improved characteristics of type II inhibitors over type I inhibitors, translation to clinical studies has not achieved vastly superior results. Therefore, additional scaffolds and modes of inhibition have been sought. One such method has been termed type III inhibitors or allosteric kinase inhibitors. Exploiting less-conserved areas of the kinase distinct from the ATP-binding site offers the opportunity to develop unique inhibitors for a particular kinase with high selectivity because of the divergence of sequence in these less-conserved regions of the kinase. Alternative sites for inhibitor binding distal to the ATP-binding site have been used by Murga and colleagues (Willemenet al.,2014). As discussed previously, they have shown that phosphorylation of the docking groove of p38 affects partner binding with reduced activation and of the kinase. A candidate inhibitor was designed to target this docking groove with some success. Targeting substrates that depend on this docking groove interaction would enable some modulation of p38 activity without global inhibition. While this approach of targeting p38 is attractive, the benefit would be increased if circumstance-specific inhibition could be achieved. Wang and colleagues have also adopted an alternative design strategy in targeting the TAB1-mediated autophosphorylation (Wanget al.,2013). A cell-permeable peptide was designed to inhibit p38 activity via the non-canonical autophosphorylation activation mechanism. We also had success with this strategy of disrupting p38alpha and TAB1 interaction, although the sequence targets were different (De Nicolaet al.,2013). A detailed structural description of the binding of TAB1 to p38alpha was used to disrupt the interaction at key contact residues with a cell-permeable peptide preventing binding and therefore p38alpha autophosphorylationin vitroandin vivo. This strategy indicates that an inhibitor that could also disrupt this interaction would be advantageous in preventing p38alpha activation during myocardial ischaemia while maintaining its other cellular roles. As summarized earlier, p38 is expressed ubiquitously and implicated in numerous and diverse pathologies. Therefore, perhaps not surprisingly, it plays an important role in many components of the cascade that leads from a healthy vasculature to myocardial infarction and heart failure. Rather than attempt to summarize these studies in the text, we have created a table (see Table 1) that highlights relevant publications addressing the role of p38 in this cascade from endothelial dysfunction - greater than atherosclerosis - greater than platelet activation/thrombosis - greater than myocardial infarction - greater than post-infarction remodelling, contractile dysfunction, arrhythmia and heart failure. As can be seen from the table, generally, p38 is activated by, and aggravates, cardiovascular pathologies. From an evolutionary standpoint, this seems counterintuitive as selection pressure has preserved p38 in yeast and man. However, the benefits of this kinase are apparent under the 'ischaemic preconditioning' heading within Table 1. Ischaemic preconditioning describes the paradoxical increase in resistance to lethal ischaemic injury that follows a brief, sublethal, period of ischaemia. Despite the fact that p38 is activated by, and contributes to, lethal ischaemic injury; it also is involved in triggering the protection of ischaemic preconditioning. Some authors have linked these effects; with transient p38 activation during short preconditioning cycles of ischaemia being responsible for diminished p38 activation during subsequent lethal more prolonged ischaemia (Nagarkatti and Sha'afi,1998; Maraiset al.,2001; Sanadaet al.,2001) These opposing roles for p38 make it difficult to predict what may happen in a clinical trial of p38 inhibition. Summary of studies examining the role of p38 in the biological processes associated with cardiovascular disease and the effects of the use of p38 inhibitors on these processesAEA, anandamide; ANF, atrial natriuretic peptide; AP, action potentials; aPL, antiphospholipid antibodies; ApoE, apolipoprotein E; AngII, angiotensin II; bFGF, basic fibroblast growth factor; CTGF, connective tissue growth factor; Ctsk, cathepsin K; Cx43, gap junction protein connexin43; DN, dominant negative; FGF, fibroblast growth factor; GlcNAc,N-acetylglucosamine; H9c2, rat myoblast cell line; Hcy, homocysteine; HHcy, hyperhomocysteinaemia; ICAM, intercellular cell adhesion molecule; IP, ischaemic preconditioning; I/R, ischaemia/reperfusion; IS, infarct size; ISO, isoproterenol; LAD, left anterior descending coronary artery; LV, left ventricle; MAPKAPK2, MAPK activated PK 2; MI, myocardial infarction; MMP, matrix metalloproteinase; NADPH, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate; NFAT, nuclear factor of activated T-cell; Npc1, Niemann-Pick disease type C1; PCADK, poly(cyclohexane-1,4-diyl acetone dimethylene ketal); PE, phenylephrine; PEG-SOD, polyethylene glycol superoxide dismutase; PV, pulmonary vein; ROS, reactive oxygen species; SB, SB203580; SERCA2, sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca2+ ATPase; SI, simulated ischaemia; SMA, smooth muscle actin; SMC, smooth muscle cell; TAC, transverse aortic constriction; TLR, Toll-like receptor; TxA2, thromboxane A2; WT, wild type. The findings that p38 activation aggravates many components of atherothrombosis and myocardial infarction, have laid the foundation for recent and relevant clinical trial activity. The companies with agents under investigation include GlaxoSmithKline (losmapimod, various trials), ArrayBioPharma (ARRY-371797, NCT02057341) and Bristol-Myers Squibb (BMS-582949, NCT00570752), although the latter programme seems inactive. GlaxoSmithKline has the most active programme with a number of phase 1 trials suggesting a potential benefit in patients with early (Cheriyanet al.,2011) and late (Sarov-Blatet al.,2010; Elkhawadet al.,2012) atherosclerosis. We have summarized these trials previously (Martinet al.,2012), and here will concentrate on the recently published SOLSTICE trial (Newbyet al.,2014). SOLSTICE was a GlaxoSmithKline-sponsored phase 2 study performed by the Duke Clinical Research Institute (NCT00910962) (Newbyet al.,2014). This study enrolled 535 patients with non-ST elevation myocardial infarction who were randomized in a 3:3:2 ratio to oral losmapimod (two regimes, both of 7.5 mg twice daily with, or without, a 15 mg initial dose) or placebo. The trial medication was initiated within 18 h of hospital presentation and continued for 12 weeks. The first dose had to be administered at least 2 h before planned percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI). This design attempted to ensure p38 was inhibited during any procedure-related exacerbation of myocardial injury. The primary end points were of safety and efficacy. The safety end point was mainly designed to detect hepatotoxicity. The efficacy end points were high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hsCRP) at 12 weeks and biomarker measures of extent of myocardial infarction. In terms of safety, there was no statistically significant increase in liver enzymes, but alanine transaminase elevations three times above the upper limit of normal were more common in the losmapimod groups. In addition, there was a statistically significant, but very small (?2 mumol.L-1), increase in serum creatinine at 12 weeks in the losmapimod groups. Study drug discontinuation was twice as frequent among patients receiving losmapimod than among those receiving placebo. This observation was of borderline significance and the cause was unknown. Serious adverse events were very similar across groups. In terms of efficacy, the principal end point, hsCRP concentration at 12 weeks, did not differ between groups. However, by 12 weeks, CRP had returned to baseline, so a discernable difference was unlikely. However, at earlier timepoints, both hsCRP and IL-6 concentrations were significantly lower in the losmapimod groups. Biomarkers of necrosis (creatine kinase and troponin I) did not differ by treatment group. However, in an MRI substudy (92 patients with paired MRI scans) losmapimod was associated with significant improvements in ejection fraction and left ventricular end-diastolic and end-systolic volumes, and also a significant reduction in discharge brain natriuretic peptide in the main cohort. Collectively, these signals hint of a benefit with losmapimod and p38 inhibition in the setting of myocardial infarction despite the fact that SOLSTICE failed to meet its primary efficacy end points. Moreover, this suggestion of benefit was observed despite a losmapimod oral dosing regime that probably only achieved a maximum of 50% inhibition of p38 at the time of peak effect which occurred 4 h after oral dosing (Barbouret al.,2013). This time-concentration profile matched the timing of PCI in SOLSTICE, where approximately 60% of patients in losmapimod and placebo groups underwent PCI at a median of about 5 h after randomization. The potential efficacy signal in SOLSTICE has encouraged a much larger phase 3 trial with clinical end points. LATITUDE-TIMI 60 (Losmapimod to inhibit p38 MAPK as a therapeutic target and modify outcomes after an acute coronary syndrome-thrombolysis in myocardial infarction 60; NCT02145468) will involve approximately 26 000 patients worldwide with myocardial infarction and have a study design similar to SOLSTICE, but without the 15 mg loading group (i.e. losmapimod 7.5 mg twice per day vs. placebo). The primary efficacy end point is a composite of major adverse cardiovascular events comprising cardiovascular death, reinfarction or recurrent myocardial ischaemia requiring urgent revascularization at 12 weeks. The main inclusion criterion is type 1 myocardial infarction (an atherosclerotic plaque rupture event) and will include presentation electrocardiograms with both ST and no ST elevation. Study medication will be continued for 12 weeks and follow-up for 24 weeks. It is anticipated that the study will be completed in December 2018. The p38 MAPK pathway is integrated with multiple other signalling pathways at different levels. For example, p38alpha has been shown to phosphorylate glycogen synthase kinase 3 and the Wnt signalling pathways (Bikkavilliet al.,2008; Thorntonet al.,2008). p38alpha is part of numerous feedback mechanisms. A recent paper has also indicated p38alpha may participate in multiprotein complex hypertrophy mediated by a PKA anchoring protein, in combination with MKK3. In addition, p38alpha is located within a number of feedback loops. These studies reflect p38alpha as a signalling nexus of multiple signalling pathways the specifics of which are continuing to be elucidated. The multiple pathways also illustrate the complexity in targeting a single PK. It is clear that multiple related pathways may be affected if a single protein is inhibited. Therefore, the ideal inhibition of a kinase requires selective, temporally discrete and circumstance-specific inhibition. Global inhibition of p38alpha can lead to detrimental effects to the homeostasis of the organism. Pharmacological inhibition of p38 has been achieved, but the results of the preclinical trials, although encouraging, have not translated to clinical trials with a similar level of success. Therefore, a more selective targeted inhibition of the kinase that could ameliorate the detrimental consequence of activation of the kinase while maintaining the essential functions of the kinase would be highly desirable. The recent studies indicating the TAB1-induced activation of the kinase that mediates myocardial damage would be an eligible target for inhibition and that would allow the circumstance-specific mode of activation to be exploited.