Because of an increase in participationNoneand the potential for sport-related injuries in interscholastic athletics,Noneidentifying appropriate medical coverage and care for secondary school athletes has become an important topic within the sports medicine community. NoneRecommendations for medical coverage and care have historically been based primarily on injury risk data from epidemiologic investigations. However, while epidemiologic studies have provided an abundance of data regarding the incidence and rates of injury between the sexes,None,None,Nonein different sports,NoneNoneNone-None,NoneNone-None,None,None,Noneand across different levels of play,None,None,Nonethese investigations often exclude many tasks performed by the athletic medicine staff, including injury prevention and rehabilitation, that are essential elements of high-quality medical coverage and care. As a result, sports medicine organizations such as the National Athletic Trainers' Association (NATA),NoneAmerican Orthopaedic Society for Sports Medicine,Noneand American Medical Society for Sports MedicineNonehave recently highlighted the need to include the wide variety of tasks associated with assessing, treating, and managing sport-related injuries and illnesses when determining appropriate medical coverage for secondary school athletes, including clinician demands for the development of injury and illness strategies and the treatment and rehabilitation of time loss and non-time loss injuries in various sports. None,None,NoneThe inclusion of other clinical practice factors beyond injury incidences and rates is important in determining appropriate medical coverage and care because many duties provided by the athletic medicine staff include preventative measures and treatment for non-time loss injuries (eg, overuse injuries) and may be unaccounted for, by definition, in epidemiologic studies. None,NoneHowever, without adequate clinical data of preventative, treatment, and rehabilitation efforts for all types of sports and injuries, determining appropriate medical coverage and care for secondary school athletes can be difficult. However, these investigations were broad in scope considering typical practice patternsNoneand an aggregate of all documented injuriesNoneand did not account for injuries sustained in different sports. Specific attention toward injuries grouped by sports as well as an understanding of the treatment characteristics associated with these injuries is needed to aid in medical coverage recommendations and patient care decisions. Therefore, the purpose of this study was to describe the injury and treatment characteristics of injuries sustained by patients participating in various interscholastic sports as recorded through a national practice-based research network. This study was a retrospective analysis of de-identified patient records within a Web-based electronic medical record (EMR). The A.T. Still University Institutional Review Board exempted the study because the study was deemed to be a retrospective analysis of de-identified patient records. All records were created by an athletic trainer (AT) who was a member of the Athletic Training Practice-Based Research Network (AT-PBRN)Noneand was providing patient care in a secondary school. The ATs practiced in 62 secondary schools across 14 different states (Arizona, California, Connecticut, Florida, Kansas, Massachusetts, Minnesota, Missouri, New Hampshire, New York, Utah, Virginia, Vermont, Wisconsin). Most schools were public (85%) and coeducational (95%) institutions, set in an urban area (71%), and employed 1 certified AT (77%). On average, ATs collected data over 16.1 +/- 12.5 months (range, 1-48 months). To ensure data quality, all ATs completed a formal, 2-hour EMR training session prior to joining the AT-PBRN, and the administrative team of the AT-PBRN routinely reviewed the clinical data entered into the EMR relational database. NonePatients who were diagnosed with a sport-related injury between October 1, 2009 and October 31, 2013 and participated in an interscholastic sport were included in this report (Table 1). A sport-related injury was defined as that diagnosed by a health care provider (eg, AT, physician) and required at least 1 AT service, such as an initial evaluation. A Certification of Honest Broker System/Processes provided by the EMR developer (Essentialtalk) ensured that patient data obtained by the AT-PBRN research team were void of all federally defined personal identifiers (ie, protected health information). NoneInjuries and athletic training services documented within the AT-PBRN grouped by sportAT-PBRN, Athletic Training Practice-Based Research Network. Clinical data were recorded in a Web-based EMR previously described by Valovich McLeod et al. NoneAT services were recorded as International Classification of Diseases, Ninth Revision (ICD-9) and Current Procedural Terminology (CPT)Nonecodes within the EMR. All variables of interest were grouped based on sport and reported using summary statistics. Patient demographics included age, sex, height, and weight of the patient, while injury characteristics were represented by sport, body part, and diagnosis (ICD-9 code). The most frequent injuries were reported for each sport. Treatment characteristics included the type (CPT code), amount (number of services for the duration of care), and duration (number of days between the initial evaluation to the last documented episode of care) of care for each injury. A total of 5595 sport-related injuries (boys, 3302; age, 16.3 +/- 1.5 years and girls, 2293; age, 16.0 +/- 1.4 years) were documented during the study period. The 10 sports reporting the most injuries during the study years accounted for 84% of all documented injuries (Table 1). In general, concussions and a sprain or strain of the ankle, knee, and thigh/hip/groin were the most documented injuries, in varying rank order, across most sports (Table 2). Common injuries documented for the top 10 sports reporting the most injuries in the AT-PBRNNoneAT-PBRN, Athletic Training Practice-Based Research Network; ICD-9, International Classification of Diseases, Ninth Revision. Boldfaced values indicate the top 5 injuries for each sport. A total of 20,911 services were recorded during the study period. Across all sports, the most frequently reported service was AT evaluation or reevaluation, followed by hot or cold pack, therapeutic exercise or activities, manual therapy techniques or massage, electrical stimulation, and strapping of lower extremity joints (ankle, foot, hip knees, toes) (Table 3). The only exceptions were reported for football, in which more strapping of the upper extremity was reported than manual therapy or massage; boys' basketball, in which more whirlpool treatments were reported than electrical stimulation treatments; and boys' wrestling, in which more strapping of the upper extremity was reported than electrical stimulation (Table 4). Girls' soccer, boys' track and field, and girls' track and field reported the highest number of services per injury (Table 5). Boys' track and field reported the longest average duration of care (18.1 +/- 72.9 days), while girls' softball reported the shortest average duration of care (6.2 +/- 10.8 days). Athletic training services recorded during study periodCPT, Current Procedural Terminology. Common athletic training services documented for the top 10 sports reporting the most injuries, n (%)Amount and duration of care per injury for the top 10 sports reporting the most injuriesOur findings are similar to previous epidemiologicNone,None,None,None,None,None,None,None,None,Noneand clinical practice characteristics investigationsNoneand suggest that secondary school ATs tend to diagnose similar injuries and use similar methods to treat these injuries, regardless of sport. While the injury characteristics were generally similar across sports, there were a few trends noted between sports. For example, boys' wrestling included diagnoses related to general medical skin conditions (ie, tinea, folliculitis, herpes simplex) and sprain or strain of the neck, while boys' wrestling and girls' softball were the only sports where sprain or strain of the elbow was documented as a common injury. It appears that the types of injuries suffered during girls' soccer, girls' track and field, and boys' track and field tend to require more time and effort to provide treatment and care than other sports. Girls' soccer and basketball required longer durations of care when compared with boys' soccer and basketball, respectively. In contrast, boys' track and field required longer durations of care when compared with girls' track and field. The basis of determining appropriate medical coverage and care, as described by the NATA's Appropriate Medical Coverage of Intercollegiate Athletics (AMCIA)Nonedocument, is the relative workload of each sport. To calculate the relative work load for each sport, AMCIA guidelines recommend multiplying the injury risk (based on multiyear injury surveillance data) with the average number of treatments per injury. As a result, certain sports may require increased coverage because of increased risk of injury. Contact sports like football and soccer often require daily on-field practice and game coverage because of the increased risk of catastrophic injuries. In contrast, noncontact sports such as track and field may not require on-field event coverage but may require the same or greater amount of time to care for chronic, overuse, and recurrent injuries that may linger for a large portion of a season. While our inclusion of the type, amount, and duration of care offers a more comprehensive perspective on the demands on ATs, our data set likely does not provide a complete picture in terms of all of the treatments delivered in the secondary school setting. To continue the discussion related to appropriate medical coverage and care within the context of AMCIANoneand Appropriate Medical Coverage for Secondary School Athletes summary document,Nonefuture studies should aim to capture data for services that are associated with non-time loss injuries and preventative services in the secondary school setting. This study is not without its limitations. We analyzed injuries based on ICD-9 coding which, at times, did not allow us to identify a specific diagnosis for an injury. Our analyses may have been more informative if we were able to differentiate between sprain and strain injuries, for example. Secondary school ATs tend to diagnose similar injuries and use similar treatment methods, regardless of sport. ATs covering wrestling should pay special attention to skin conditions and should be well prepared to prevent and treat these conditions.