gammadelta T cells constitute less than 5% of the total peripheral T cells in mice and human, and our understanding of these rare lymphocytes is poor. We and others recently reported that a subset of gammadelta T cells in naive animals spontaneously acquire a capacity to express proinflammatory cytokines, IL-17 or IFNgamma, which is in good contrast to CD4 T cells in which the expression is induced only after an antigen-mediated activation/differentiation processNone-None. Interesting is that IL-17 expression in gammadelta T cells is acquired during thymic development via a TGFbeta1-dependent mechanismNone. In the periphery, IL-17+ gammadelta T cells are maintained at a constant level, although a mechanism that governs the maintenance remains uncertain. gammadelta T cells have been implicated to play critical roles in protecting hosts from bacterial infection by recruiting neutrophilsNone-None. Recently it was also shown that gammadelta T cells are capable of amplifying the generation of autoreactive Th17 CD4 T cells, thus exacerbating Th17-dependent autoimmunity,None,None. Therefore, understanding how cytokine production in gammadelta T cells is regulated and maintained is of crucial importance. Despite obvious disparities between gammadelta and alphabeta T cells, they seem to cooperate (and/or counter-regulate) their development and functions in many ways. It was shown that alphabeta T cell progenitors (CD4+CD8+ double positive thymocytes) play key roles in generating gammadelta T cells in the thymus via a mechanism involving lymphotoxin (LT) betaNone,None. Functionally, gammadelta cells developed in the absence of DP thymocytes (i.e., TCRbeta-/-) displayed altered gene expression profiles, with impaired proliferation and IFNgamma production following in vitro stimulationNone,None. Inversely, gammadelta T cells were also shown to regulate the development of IL-17+ CD4 (Th17) cellsNone,None. However, whether alphabeta T cells contribute to the generation of IL-17+ gammadelta T cells has not been examined. In this study we investigated the development and the cytokine profiles of gammadelta T cells from various T cell-deficient animals to examine a potential cross-regulation mechanism between the T cell subsets and uncovered a novel CD4-dependent mechanism that shapes the generation of IL-17+ gammadelta T cell subsets in naive settings. Consistent with previous reportsNone, 10~50-fold more gammadelta T cells were found in the secondary lymphoid tissues of TCRbeta-/- mice than in wild type mice; ~10-fold increase in the spleen and ~50-fold increase in the LNs (Fig. 1A). The increase was already noticeable in the thymus (Fig. 1A). The expression of active cell cycle marker, Ki-67, was substantially higher in gammadelta T cells of TCRbeta-/- compared to those cells of wild type mice (Fig. S1). Similar results were also observed in another alphabeta T cell-deficient TCRalpha-/- mice (data not shown). Such an increase in gammadelta T cell generation was not found in mice deficient in either CD4 or CD8 T cells, MHC II-/- and beta2m-/- mice, respectively. As shown inFig. 1B, the total numbers of gammadelta T cells in the lymphoid tissues remained unchanged in wild type, MHC II-/-, and beta2m-/- mice, suggesting that gammadelta T cell development and expansion is only enhanced when both alphabeta T cell subsets are absent. When either CD4 or CD8 T cells are present, gammadelta T cell generation is controlled as seen in wild type mice. Consistent with this result, homeostatic proliferation of gammadelta T cells was induced only in the absence of both alphabeta and gammadelta T cellsNone. In gammadelta T cell-deficient TCRdelta-/- mice, adoptively transferred gammadelta T cells failed to undergo homeostatic proliferation, suggesting that alphabeta T cells of the recipients are capable of inhibiting the proliferation. Notwithstanding the significant elevation of gammadelta T cell cellularity in TCRbeta-/- mice, the overall profiles of Vgamma repertoire remained relatively similar between wild type and TCRbeta-/- mice, although the proportion of Vgamma1 and Vgamma7 gammadelta T cells seemed altered in TCRbeta-/- mice (Fig. 1C). Some gammadelta T cells in naive animals produce effector cytokines including IFNgamma and IL-17 following stimulationNone,None,None. A previous study reported impaired gammadelta T cell IFNgamma production when gammadelta T cells from TCRbeta-/- mice were stimulated with anti-CD3 Ab in vitroNone. However, we noticed that IFNgamma expression was significantly enhanced when gammadelta T cells isolated from TCRbeta-/- mice were ex vivo stimulated (Fig. 2A). Enhanced gammadelta T cell IFNgamma expression was similarly found in other T cell-deficient TCRalpha-/- and CD4-/- mice (data not shown). Interestingly, IL-17 expression by gammadelta T cells was significantly reduced in TCRbeta-/- compared to wild type mice (Fig. 2A). Likewise, reduced IL-17 expression was also noticed in other T cell-deficient TCRalpha-/- and CD4-/- mice (data not shown). Interestingly, it was previously shown that the lack of DP thymocytes impairs normal development of gammadelta T cells in TCRbeta-/-, a defect not found in TCRalpha-/- miceNone. However, we reproducibly found that the total numbers of IFNgamma- and IL-17- producing gammadelta T cells in TCRbeta-/- and TCRalpha-/- mice were similar (Fig. 2B), suggesting that DP thymocytes do not affect the development of cytokine producing gammadelta T cells. Additional studies on the gammadelta T cell development in various conditions will be needed to clarify the discrepancy. Notably, we found no difference in IL-17+ gammadelta T cells in the gut associated tissues (intraepithelial cells and lamina propria gammadelta T cells), suggesting that the defect of IL-17+ gammadelta T cells in TCRbeta-/- mice could not be attributed to different homing pattern of gammadelta T cells (Fig. S2). Consistent with the FACS results, peripheral LN gammadelta T cells purified from TCRbeta-/- mice expressed lessil17aand moreifngmRNA (Fig. 2C). Thus, altered cytokine profile seen in TCRbeta-/-gammadelta T cells is not an artifact of ex vivo restimulation. Nevertheless, we observed that the proliferation of gammadelta T cells was not affected. This conclusion was made from experiments in which FACS sorted gammadelta T cells were transferred into lymphopenic Rag1-/- recipients and examined for homeostatic proliferationNone,None. Both gammadelta T cells isolated from wild type and TCRbeta-/- mice underwent equivalent homeostatic proliferation in Rag1-/- recipients (Fig. 2D). Although it was previously reported that the proliferation of TCRbeta-/- gammadelta T cells was impaired when stimulated with anti-CD3 in vitroNone, no defects were found in proliferation in vivo. Consistent with this finding, French et al. recently reported an efficient homeostatic proliferation of gammadelta T cells isolated from TCRbeta-/- miceNone. Because some TCRbeta-/- mice are known to spontaneously develop inflammation in the intestine beginning at ~4-6 months of ageNone, we examined if altered cytokine profiles seen above are the result of inflammation that might have developed in the intestine. Notably, all TCRbeta-/- mice used in this study were ~2 months of age, and did not show any signs of disease at the time of experiments. We measured cytokine expression in mice of different ages. As shown inFigs. 3AandS3, thymic expression of IL-17 in gammadelta thymocytes was similarly regulated in both wild type and TCRbeta-/- mice, although the proportion of IL-17+ gammadelta T cells in the periphery was higher in wild type mice. Interestingly, gammadelta T cell IFNgamma expression in the periphery was similar prior to the 3 weeks of age; however, it became greater in TCRbeta-/- mice starting at 4 weeks of age (Fig. 3AandS3). Thymic IFNgamma expression in gammadelta T cells was relatively low; however, slightly higher expression was consistently found in TCRbeta-/- mice (Fig. 3AandS3). Therefore, the altered cytokine profiles seen in TCRbeta-/- gammadelta T cells are not the consequence of dysregulated inflammation in vivo. In terms of absolute numbers of cytokine-expressing gammadelta T cells, however, significantly higher levels of IFNgamma-/IL-17-expressing gammadelta T cells were consistently found in TCRbeta-/- mice regardless of their age, supporting an earlier finding of elevated expansion of gammadelta T cells without alphabeta T cells (Fig. 3A). It was recently reported that CD27 and CCR6 expression in gammadelta T cells marks IFNgamma- and IL-17 production in gammadelta T cell subsets, respectivelyNone,None. Indeed, IFNgamma-producing gammadelta T cells were CD27+ CCR6-, while IL-17-producing gammadelta T cells were CD27- CCR6+ (Fig. S4). Phenotypes of IFNgamma- and IL-17- producing gammadelta T cells were thus examined in different strains of mice. In all mice tested (wild type, TCRbeta-/- and TCRalpha-/-), IFNgamma-producing gammadelta T cells were CD27+ and IL-17-producing gammadelta T cells were CD27- (Fig. 3B). The proportion of CD27+ IFNgamma+ gammadelta T cells was significantly higher, while the proportion of IL-17+ CD27-gammadelta T cells was substantially lower in TCRbeta-/- and TCRalpha-/- mice (Fig. 3B). Therefore, surface phenotypes of IFNgamma- and IL-17-producing gammadelta T cells are not different in wild type and T cell-deficient mice. While the absence of alphabeta TCR+ cells alters both the development and the cytokine expression of gammadelta T cells (Fig. 1A), the lack of either alphabeta T cell subset does not affect gammadelta T cell development (Fig. 1B). We thus examined gammadelta T cell cytokine profiles in MHC II-/- and beta2m-/- mice. Interestingly, the level of IL-17+ pLN gammadelta T cells was significantly reduced in MHC II-/- mice (Fig. 4A). Because similar defect was also found in CD4-/- mice (data not shown), this finding suggests that CD4 T cell deficiency may specifically affect IL-17 expression in gammadelta T cells. On the contrary, MHC II deficiency did not affect IFNgamma expression in gammadelta T cells. Instead, in beta2m-/- mice gammadelta T cell IFNgamma production was significantly elevated, while the frequency of IL-17+ gammadelta T cells remained unchanged (Fig. 4A). Since it was recently shown that beta2m negatively controls the homeostatic proliferation of gammadelta T cellsNone, it is possible that beta2m rather than CD8 T cell deficiency may enhance IFNgamma expression. Of note, the total numbers of IL-17- and IFNgamma-expressing gammadelta T cells should mirror the frequency of those cells, since the total numbers of gammadelta T cells in those mice are relatively similar (Fig. 1B). The lack of T cells in TCRbeta-/- mice could alter NK cell homeostasisNone, which then suggests that gammadelta T cells may be exposed to a relatively increased proportion of NK cells and possibly to a increased load of NK cell-derived IFNgamma. Depletion of NK cells in TCRbeta-/- mice did not affect IL-17-producing gammadelta T cells. Because IFNgamma can suppress IL-17 expressionNone, unchanged IL-17 expression following NK cell depletion strongly suggests a minimal contribution of NK cells in gammadelta T cell activity (Fig. 4B). To directly examine the role of CD4 T cells in gammadelta T cell IL-17 expression, we depleted CD4 T cells in wild type mice and compared gammadelta T cell cytokine expression. CD4 T cell depletion significantly diminished IL-17 expression in gammadelta T cells, to a level similar to that seen in TCRbeta-/- mice; however, CD4 T cell depletion did not change IFNgamma expression in gammadelta T cells (Fig. 5A). When CD8 T cells were depleted instead, gammadelta T cell IL-17 expression was only slightly reduced, and no effect on the gammadelta T cell IFNgamma expression was found (Fig. 5A), further supporting the beta2m-mediated downregulation of gammadelta T cell activityNone. Moreover, the total numbers of IL-17+ gammadelta T cells within the all tested tissues of wild type mice dramatically decreased following CD4 T cell depletion (Fig. 5B). Given the fact that the number of IFNgamma+ gammadelta T cells remained unaltered by T cell depletion, the survival of IL-17+ gammadelta T cell subsets might depend upon CD4 T cells. Of note, some gammadelta T cells express CD4 or CD8 surface markersNone. Therefore, anti-CD4 or anti-CD8 Ab treatment might deplete those cells as well. However, we found that IL-17-producing gammadelta T cells expressed neither CD4 nor CD8 (Fig. 5C). Therefore, anti-CD4 Ab induced reduction in IL-17+ gammadelta T cells cannot be attributed to depletion of those cells. The finding that IL-17 expression in gammadelta T cells is CD4-dependent was further confirmed by adoptive transfer experiments. Transfer of CD4 T cells into TCRbeta-/- recipients significantly increased IL-17 expression of gammadelta T cells, while gammadelta T cell IFNgamma expression remained unaltered (Fig. 5D). Of note, gammadelta T cell IFNgamma (and IL-17) expression remained unchanged after adoptive transfer of CD8 T cells (Fig. 5D). Consistently, CD4 transfer dramatically increased the total numbers of IL-17+ gammadelta T cells in TCRbeta-/- recipients, while CD8 T cell transfer did not alter those cells (Fig. 5E). IFNgamma+ gammadelta T cell numbers remained constant regardless of T cells transferred (Fig. 5E). To examine the mechanism of CD4 T cell dependent gammadelta T cell IL-17 production, pLN gammadelta T cells were FACS sorted and in vitro stimulated with IL-1 plus IL-23, which was recently shown to activate IL-17 production in gammadelta T cellsNone. WT gammadelta T cells (100,000 cells per well) produced ~3ng/ml of IL-17 within 12 hours following stimulation, while gammadelta T cells from TCRbeta-/- mice produced less than 1ng/ml of IL-17 under the same condition (Fig. S5). It is important to point out that the frequency of IL-17+ gammadelta T cells in these mice are at least 3~4-fold different (Fig. 2A); i.e., 15,000~20,000 out of the total 100,000 wild type gammadelta T cells per well are expected to produce IL-17, while only less than 5000 out of the total 100,000 TCRbeta-/- gammadelta T cells per well are expected to produce IL-17 under the same condition. In order to compare IL-17 expression on a per cell basis, we examined the mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) of IL-17 expression in gammadelta T cells. As shown inFig. 5F, the MFI of wild type gammadelta IL-17 staining was significantly higher than that of TCRbeta-/- gammadelta T cells (290 +/- 53 for wild type vs. 95 +/- 4 for TCRbeta-/-). gammadelta T cells from TCRbeta-/- mice that received CD4 T cells showed a significant increase of the IL-17 MFI (224 +/- 7 after CD4 transfer), while CD8 T cell transfer into TCRbeta-/- mice failed to exert such an enhancing effect (Figs. 5D, 5E, and 5F). Therefore, these results strongly support that CD4 T cells augment IL-17 production by gammadelta T cells on a per cell basis. Because we recently reported that TGFbeta1 plays an irreplaceable role in inducing IL-17 expression in gammadelta T cellsNone, we tested whether TGFbeta1 is also involved in CD4-mediated gammadelta T cell IL-17 production. CD4 T cells were adoptively transferred into TCRbeta-/- recipients and neutralizing anti-TGFbeta1 or control rat Ab was injected into the recipients. TCRbeta-/- recipients of CD4 T cells injected with control rat IgG had significantly increased IL-17 expression in pLN gammadelta T cells (Fig. 6A). However, anti-TGFbeta1 Ab completely abrogated the effect (Fig. 6A). Anti-TGFbeta1 Ab treatment slightly increased IFNgamma production by pLN gammadelta T cells; however, the increase was relatively small (Fig. 6A). Furthermore, the increase in the total numbers of IL-17+ gammadelta T cells by CD4 T cell transfer was abolished by TGFbeta1 neutralization (Fig. 6B). Therefore, CD4 T cell-mediated increase in gammadelta T cell IL-17 production is TGFbeta1-dependent. CD25+ Treg cells are known to exert regulatory functions by producing TGFbeta1None. Therefore, we tested if Tregs might be the source of TGFbeta1 to control gammadelta T cell IL-17 expression. To test this possibility, CD25- naive CD4 T cells were transferred into TCRbeta-/- mice. As shown inFig. S6, non-Treg CD4 T cells were capable of enhancing gammadelta T cell IL-17 expression, suggesting that TGFbeta1 required for the effect is not necessarily derived from Tregs. To further examine if CD4-mediated increase in gammadelta T cell IL-17 expression is regulated by cytokines produced by activated T cells, we generated Th1, Th2, and Th17 effector CD4 T cells in vitro, and adoptively transferred into TCRbeta-/- recipients. Prior to transfer, CD4 T cell cytokine profiles were determined to ensure differentiation status (Fig. 7A). gammadelta T cell cytokine expression was subsequently examined. As shown inFig. 7B, IL-17 expression in gammadelta T cells was significantly elevated only after Th17 CD4 T cell transfer. Both Th1 and Th2 effector CD4 T cells were unable to do so. On the other hand, IFNgamma expression in gammadelta T cells was not affected by CD4 T cells regardless of their differentiation phenotypes, consistent with the earlier findings (Fig. 5). Since naive CD4 T cells transferred into lymphopenic mice are expected to differentiated into IL-17-producing Th17 type cells, which may contribute to the development of intestinal inflammation, our results strongly suggest that Th17 effector cells generated during in vivo proliferation may enhance gammadelta T cell IL-17 expression. Unlike alphabeta T cells, the majority of gammadelta T cells from naive animals display phenotypes of effector/memory cells and are capable of producing effector cytokines such as IFNgamma and IL-17 upon stimulationNone. However, a mechanism underlying the generation and maintenance of the cytokine-producing gammadelta T cells in vivo remains obscure. Our data unveils a novel regulatory mechanism in which CD4 T cells maintain IL-17-producing gammadelta T cell subsets via a TGFbeta1-dependent manner in vivo. The fact that depleting CD4 (but not CD8) T cells in wild type mice dramatically reduced the proportion as well as the total numbers of IL-17+ gammadelta T cells in the periphery strongly suggests that the CD4-mediated control is an active process during which gammadelta T cell survival may improve. In support of this notion, CD4 T cells transferred into TCRbeta-/- mice dramatically increased the IL-17-producing gammadelta T cell subsets. It is important to point out that CD4 T cell proliferation that occurs within TCRbeta-/- mice as a homeostatic mechanism is not a requirement for the CD4-mediated effect because: 1) a similar effect is also seen in wild type mice and 2) CD8 T cell transferred into TCRbeta-/- mice fail to do so despite their proliferation. Interestingly, the proportion (and the kinetics of development) of IL-17+ gammadelta T cells within the thymus of TCRbeta-/- mice was similar to that seen in the thymus of wild type mice. Thus, CD4-dependent maintenance of IL-17+ gammadelta T cells may operate primarily in the periphery and that the thymic differentiation and peripheral maintenance of IL-17+ gammadelta T cells may be regulated by a separate mechanism that has yet to be identified. CD4 T cell-mediated effects in IL-17+ gammadelta T cell maintenance required TGFbeta1, a major cytokine produced by CD25+ TregsNone. However, adoptive transfer of non-Tregs was highly efficient in elevating IL-17+ gammadelta T cells in the periphery, suggesting that Tregs are not responsible for the maintenance. Instead, we found that in vitro differentiated IL-17-producing Th17 effector CD4 T cells were highly efficient in enhancing IL-17 expression in gammadelta T cells compared to Th1 or Th2 phenotype effector T cells, although whether IL-17 produced by these cells directly mediates the effect remains to be determined. Whether Th17 CD4 T cells are the source of TGFbeta1, or whether Th17 CD4 T cells induce TGFbeta1 from other sources needs to be identified. Alternatively, TGFbeta1 may act on CD4 T cells, which then may promote Th17 differentiation and enhance IL-17 production in gammadelta T cells. Importantly, the 'basal' level IL-17+ gammadelta T cells found in TCRbeta-/- mice was not affected by TGFbeta1 neutralization. TGFbeta2/beta3, unknown factors, or both may be involved in this process. Unexpectedly, IFNgamma expression in gammadelta T cells was significantly elevated in TCRbeta-/- mice. It was previously shown that the absence of alphabeta T cell progenitors (DP thymocytes) in TCRbeta-/- mice impairs gammadelta T cell development and functions via a LTbeta-dependent 'trans-conditioning' mechanismNone. On the contrary, we reproducibly observed that gammadelta T cell IFNgamma expression was equivalent or higher in T cell-deficient (TCRbeta-/- or TCRalpha-/-) mice. In fact, we compared IFNgamma intracellular expression between wild type and TCRbeta-/- gammadelta T cells in more than ten independent experiments and obtained the similar results. Moreover, no difference in IFNgamma expression as well as in the total numbers of IFNgamma-/IL-17-producing gammadelta T cells was noticed between gammadelta T cells from TCRbeta-/- and TCRalpha-/- mice. A mechanism underlying the discrepancy is unclear. It was previously shown that gammadelta T cells isolated from TCRbeta-/- and wild type mice displayed identical cytokine production pattern under Th1 and Th2 polarization conditionsNone. T-bet expression in gammadelta T cells (isolated from TCRbeta-/- mice) was shown to enhance IFNgamma production, which was not counterbalanced by GATA-3 expression, suggesting the default synthesis of IFNgamma by gammadelta T cellsNone. More rigorous study to identify cellular and molecular mechanism underlying alphabeta T cell-dependent gammadelta T cell activation, if any, will be needed to account for this discrepancy. From the standpoint of T cell homeostasis, it is interesting to see that the total numbers of developing (and peripheral) gammadelta T cells are substantially elevated in the absence of alphabeta T cells, which suggests that the observed altered frequency of IFNgamma- and IL-17-producing gammadelta T cells may reflect a unique requirements for homeostatic expansion of these T cell subsets. Since the lack of either CD4 or CD8 T cell subset did not alter gammadelta T cell homeostasis, either T cell subset is fully capable of controlling over-expansion of gammadelta T cells, possibly via cytokinesNone. Nevertheless, a regulatory mechanism between IL-17-producing gammadelta and CD4 T cells identified from the current study is still in place. Whether such requirements for gammadelta T cell expansion differ based on the cytokine profiles will require further examination. The lack of T cells in TCRbeta-/- mice could alter NK cell activity, which then might influence gammadelta T cell cytokine production. However, it was previously shown that NK cell activity is not controlled by T cells including regulatory Treg cellsNone. Consistent with this, depletion of NK cells using anti-NK1.1 Ab did not alter IL-17 production by gammadelta T cells. We are aware that some IFNgamma+ gammadelta T cells express NK1.12. However, it should be noted that the proportion of those cells was only ~5%2, suggesting a minimal contribution. Alternatively, gammadelta T cells in TCRbeta-/- mice may be exposed to increased level of APC interactions (primarily due to lack of T cells), which may result in an altered state of differentiation status of gammadelta T cells. alphabeta and gammadelta T cells have been found to counter-regulate each other in many ways. gammadelta T cells can downregulate alphabeta T cell activity because alphabeta T cells isolated from mice injected with anti-gammadelta TCR (GL3) Ab undergo robust proliferation as well as produce elevated effector cytokines upon in vitro stimulationNone. gammadelta T cells were also shown to amplify the generation of IL-17+ CD4 T cells in autoimmune settingsNone. Foxp3+ CD4 Treg cells were recently shown to suppress proliferation and cytokine production of gammadelta T cellsNone. Consistent with the results reported here, Cui et al. recently reported that the presence of alphabeta T cells dramatically increases IL-17 production of gammadelta T cells in vitro and that this effect is mediated by cell-to-cell contactNone. In human, CD27- Vgamma9Vdelta2 T cells were shown to be absent in immunocompromised hostsNone. It will be important to test how such counter-regulation influences immune responses. Collectively, our results reveal an important regulatory mechanism that balances gammadelta T cell subset homeostasis by CD4 T cells; alphabeta (specifically CD4) T cells not only maintain the size of peripheral gammadelta T cells but also optimize the development of IL-17+ gammadelta T cell subsets. gammadelta T cell-derived IL-17 plays critical roles in clearing certain microbes through neutrophil mobilizationNone,None,None. Therefore, understanding in vivo cross-regulation between these two T cell subsets will be of great importance to define a homeostatic mechanism that equips proper 'innate' effector cells such as IL-17+ gammadelta T cells prior to antigenic challenge. C57BL/6, TCRbeta-/-, TCRalpha-/-, MHC II-/-, beta2m-/-, and Rag1-/- mice were purchased from The Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, ME). All experimental procedures were conducted according to the guidelines of the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of the Cleveland Clinic Foundation. Spleen, pLN (axillary and cervical LN) and mesenteric LN (mLN) cells were separately harvested and ex vivo stimulated with PMA (10ng/ml) and Ionomycin (1 muM) for 4 hrs in the presence of 2 muM monensin (Calbiochem, San Diego, CA) during the last 2 hrs. Cells were immediately fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde, permeabilized, and stained with fluorescence conjugated antibodies. In some experiment, IL-17 production by gammadelta T cells was examined by ELISA. Both coating and detection anti-IL-17A mAbs were purchased from eBioscience (San Diego, CA). The following antibodies were used: biotinylated anti-gammadelta TCR (GL3), PE-anti-gammadelta TCR (GL3), PE-anti-IFNgamma (XMG1.2), PE-anti-IL-17 (ebio17B7), PE-anti-CD27 (LG.7F9), APC-anti-IL-17 (ebio17B7), APC-anti-CCR6 (R35-95), FITC-anti-Human Ki-67, and FITC-anti-IFNgamma (XMG1.2) Abs. All antibodies were purchased from eBioscience (San Diego, CA) or PharMingen (BD Bioscience, San Jose, CA). FITC-anti-Vgamma1 (clone 2.11, refNone), FITC-anti-Vgamma4 (clone UC3, refNone), biotinylated-anti-Vgamma5 (clone 536, refNone), and FITC-anti-Vg7 (clone UC1, refNone) Abs were prepared by the O'Brien laboratory using standard method as previously describedNone,None. In some experiments, gammadelta T cells from the lymphoid tissues were sorted using a FACSAria cell sorter (Becton Dickinson, Franklin Lakes, NJ). Sorted gammadelta T cells were labeled with carboxyfluorescein succinimidyl ester (CFSE, Molecular Probe, Carlsbad, CA) and subsequently i.v. transferred into Rag1-/- recipients. Recipients were sacrificed 7 days post transfer, and CFSE profiles of the gammadelta T cells were examined. In some experiments, naive CD4 or CD8 T cells were FACS sorted and i.v. transferred into TCRbeta-/- recipients (3 * 106cells per recipient). gammadelta T cell cytokine expression was determined 2 weeks post transfer. Cells were acquired using a FACSCalibur or LSRII cytometer (Becton Dickinson), and the data were analyzed using FlowJo software (Treestar, Ashland, OR). Naive CD4 T cells were cocultured with T-depleted splenocytes in the presence of soluble anti-CD3 (1mug/ml) and anti-CD28 (1mug/ml) Abs. For Th1 differentiation, IL-12 (10ng/ml) and anti-IL-4 Ab (10mug/ml) were added. For Th2 differentiation, IL-4 (1000U/ml), anti-IFNgamma Ab (10mug/ml), and anti-IL-12 Ab (10mug/ml) were added. For Th17 differentiation, TGFbeta1 (5ng/ml), IL-6 (10ng/ml), anti-IFNgamma Ab (10mug/ml), and anti-IL-4 Ab (10mug/ml) were added. CD4 T cells were reisolated from the culture and adoptively transferred into TCRbeta-/- recipients (3 * 106cells per recipient). gammadelta T cell cytokine production was determined 2 weeks post transfer. gammadelta T cells were FACS sorted from wild type or TCRbeta-/- mice. Total RNA was extracted using an RNeasy column (Qiagen, Valencia, CA). cDNA was subsequently obtained using a SuperScript III reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). Real time PCR was performed using theifng- andil17a-specific primers and probe sets (Applied Biosystem, Foster City, CA) and ABI 7500 PCR machine (Applied Biosystem). Statistical significance was determined by the Student'st-test using the Prism 4 software (GraphPad, La Jolla, CA). p less than 0.05 was considered to indicate a significant difference.