Despite advances in genomics and bioinformatics that have identified a large number of novel drug targets across disease space,1,2target-based strategies have resulted in very few new drugs. 3-5Barriers to success include the growing realization that genetic essentiality does not necessarily equate to druggability, and thus not all essential proteins are actually good targets for drug discovery. In addition, the lack of success suggests that our ability to predict efficacy and selectivity in humans at early stages of drug discovery is inadequate, highlighting the need for improved methods for correlatingin vitroandin vivomeasurements of drug activity. In the present work we demonstrate that the integration of drug-target kinetics into a mechanistic mathematical model that links drug pharmacokinetics (PK) andin vitroantibacterial activity can be used to predictin vivodrug efficacy (PD). Traditionally, the selection and optimization of drug leads is heavily reliant on thermodynamic parameters such as IC50andKdvalues. However, these equilibrium parameters are insufficient to predict efficacy and selectivity in the dynamicin vivoenvironment where drug and target are not at equilibrium. 6-11As a consequence, drug-target residence time (tR= 1/koff) has emerged as a key parameter in lead optimization in which kinetic parameters are used to drive drug discovery. 7,8,11This strategy exploits rapidin vivoclearance to achieve efficacy and selectivityviaprolonged dissociation rates from the drug target. We have developed a mechanistic PK/PD model which is capable of predictingin vivoefficacy based onin vitrodrug-target kinetic parameters. 12This model successfully predicted the antibacterial activity of aPseudomonas aeruginosaLpxC (paLpxC) inhibitor in a mouse model of infection. To evaluate the generality of our approach, we have now used the model to analyze the antibacterial activity of inhibitors that target the enoyl-ACP reductase (FabI) enzyme in the Gram-positive bacteriumStaphylococcus aureus(saFabI). 13-15ThesaFabI-inhibitors are static inhibitors ofS. aureusgrowth in contrast to thepaLpxC-inhibitors which display cidal activity against the Gram-negative pathogenP. aeruginosa. However, despite these major differences in mechanism and organism, the model is able to fit the time-dependent antibacterial activity of a series ofsaFabI inhibitors at the cellular level, and also to simulate the efficacy of two selected FabI inhibitors in an animal infection model. By comparing the relationship between target inhibition and activity in these two different systems, we are able to gain insight into target vulnerability, which characterizes the degree of inhibition required to elicit the desired pharmacodynamic (PD) response. 16,17To evaluate the applicability of the PK/PD model described previously to other systems,12we have now used the model to analyze thein vitroandin vivoactivity of inhibitors of theS. aureusFabI enzyme (saFabI) from the bacterial type II fatty acid biosynthesis pathway. OursaFabI inhibitor program has generated several series of compounds including those based on the diphenyl ether scaffold that are time-dependent enzyme inhibitors, a selection of which have excellentin vitroactivity and efficacy in animal models of infection. For the purposes of this work, we selected four compounds,PT55,PT447,PT119andSKTS1with a wide range of residence-times (Fig. 1andTable 1). PT119,PT55andPT447have been described previously. 18,19SKTS1was designed to explore a hitherto unaddressed region of the binding pocket with the ultimate goal of further increasing affinity and residence time. The binding mode obtained by docking suggests new interactions with Ala97 mediated by nearly ideal hydrogen bonds (Fig. 2). SinceSKTS1had a predicted IC50of 1 nM, which is ?200-fold lower than the corresponding value for the parent molecule 5-hexyl-2-phenoxyphenol (yellow portion ofSKTS1inFig. 2), we selected this molecule for synthesis and further investigation. NonePost-antibiotic effect (PAE) values are reported at 4x MIC. Kapp i values were determined by progress curve analysis followed by global fitting of the data to eqn (1)-(4). All four compounds showed one-step inhibition (Scheme 1), consistent with previous reports for this series of inhibitors. 18The dissociation rate constants were then determined at 37 degrees C using a jump dilution assay, in which the compounds were incubated overnight withsaFabI at a concentration above theirKivalues, after which reaction mixtures were diluted 1000-fold into the reaction buffer containing excess substrate. This approach yielded residence times of 0.04, 0.5, 1.78 and 5.75 h forPT55,PT447,PT119andSKTS1, respectively. InTable 1it can also be seen thatKappi decreases ?40-fold as residence time increases 140-fold, and thus the increase in the life-time of the drug-target complex results primarily from ground state stabilization in addition to a modest change in transition state stability. 18We next determined the time-dependent antibacterial activity of eachsaFabI inhibitor at the whole cell level by measuring the post-antibiotic effect (PAE), which is the persistent suppression of bacterial growth following antibiotic wash-out. 20In each case, a longer PAE was observed as the drug concentration increased except forSKTS1where the PAE reached a maximum at 4x MIC. PT55, asaFabI inhibitor with a very short residence time (0.04 h) had the shortest PAE (0.25 h), whilst the PAE increased with residence time for the other compounds (Table 1). The relationship between PAE and residence time (tR) is shown graphically inFig. 3, where we also present data for thepaLpxC inhibitors reported previously. 12In each case a positive slope is observed, indicating that prolonged antibacterial activity at low drug concentration is coupled to the life-time of the drug-target complex. In contrast, no correlation was observed between MIC and residence time. In order to integrate drug-target kinetics into predictions ofin vivodrug activity, we previously derived a PK/PD model in which time-dependent changes in target engagement are directly related to inhibition of bacterial growth. 12This model had to be modified slightly for use with thesaFabI inhibitors which follow an uncompetitive one-step mechanism in contrast to thepaLpxC inhibitors which bind to their targetviaa competitive two-step mechanism. The derivation of the PK/PD model is outlined in the Methods section (eqn (5)) and described in detail in the ESI (eqn (S14)None). NoneNoneEqn (5) relates the bacterial cell count ([N], CFU mL-1) to the rate of logarithmic cell growth (lambda) minus the maximum rate of inhibitor-induced cell death (epsilon) multiplied by a factor that integrates time-dependent changes in the amount of the enzyme forms that cannot sustain growth ([E] and [EI] inScheme 1). In eqn (5),k4is the rate constant for breakdown of the enzyme-inhibitor complex (ESINone),beta= 1 +Km/[S], whereM=Km/[S], andkappais a more complex function that includes the concentration of inhibitor (drug) ([I]) at the target as well as the thermodynamic affinity of the inhibitor for the enzyme (KiinScheme 1). Since the intracellular drug concentration is not known, we use a permeability factor (pm) to relate the concentration of drug in the media (or the free fraction drug concentration in plasma) to the intracellular drug concentration. In order to use eqn (5) for predictions ofin vivodrug activity, we first fit the PAE data using the equation to obtain values forMandpm. The progress curve kinetics (Table 1) yield a seed value fork4and a value for the apparentKi(Kappi) which was used as input forKi. lambda(kgrowth) was an experimental value andepsilon(kkillmax) was assumed to be similar tolambdasince thesaFabI inhibitors are static. Finally,Mwas assigned a value of unity given the general assumption that the substrate concentration is usually around the value ofKm. Non-linear regression was used to perform global fits of data to the PK/PD model, and excellent fits to the experimental data were obtained (Fig. 4) with the output parameters showing only small changes from the input seed values (Table 2), thus validating the ability of the model to correlatesaFabI inhibition within vitroantibacterial activity. NoneThesaFabI inhibitors are bacteriostatic agentsin vitroand thus the value ofkkillmaxis similar to the bacterial growth rate (kgrowth). NoneThe input value forpm/Kihas been chosen randomly within a large constraint range (1/100-100). The mechanistic PK/PD model was then used to predict thein vivoactivity of two compounds,PT55andPT119, that differ significantly in their residence times onsaFabI (0.04 and 1.78 h, respectively). The pharmacokinetic (PK) parameters of these compounds in mice were calculated after the administration of a 40 or 100 mg kg-1dose of each compound and the use of a single-compartmental PK model (Table 3). The pharmacodynamic activity of each compound was also evaluated after administration of a single dose (40 mg kg-1or 100 mg kg-1) to mice infected with MRSA by collecting the infected thighs at different time points and plating on Mueller Hinton II agar containing 5% sheep blood. The free fraction of each drug at multiple time-points was then used as input for the PK/PD model to predict drug efficacy. Importantly, this approach was able to replicate the observed change in bacterial load following administration of both drugs (Table 4andFig. 5). NoneIn vitrodata:PT55, free fraction of drug (fu) = 0.05, clog P= 3.24;PT119, fu = 0.01, clog P= 5.44. NoneFrom Wanget al. 19NoneThe bacterial growth rate (kgrowth) is assumed to be ?3-fold lower that that observed forin vitrogrowth conditions which most likely reflects nutrient limitationin vivo. 12NoneThe input value forpm/Kihas been chosen randomly within a large constraint range (1/100-100). To estimate TOminand TOmaxwe added a slope function to the PK/PD model in Mathematica. Subsequently, the parameters resulting from global fitting to the original PK/PD model were used as inputs for this new model. We analyzed three of thesaFabI inhibitors described in this work and threepaLpxC inhibitors reported previously (Table 5). 12The resulting relationship between target occupancy and antibacterial activity for these two systems has been plotted inFig. 6where it can be seen that lower values ofpaLpxC occupancy are required for activity (TOmin29%, TOmax48%) compared tosaFabI (TOmin39%, TOmax76%). ThuspaLpxC, is more vulnerable thansaFabI consistent with the correlation between drug-target residence time and PAE in both systems (Fig. 3). NoneThe output parameters from PK/PD modeling of thesaFabI inhibitorsPT119,PT447andSKTS1(Table 2) and of thepaLpxC inhibitors4-6,12were used as input for the TO PK/PD model to fit the PAE phase for each compound at specific inhibitor concentrations. The average values of TOminand TOmaxfor all the inhibitors of each target were used to generate the plot shown inFig. 5. The ultimate goal of target-based drug discovery is the prediction ofin vivoefficacy from earlyin vitroparameters. In theory, a kinetics-driven approach works in tandem with the dynamicin vivoenvironment, circumventing the traditional requirement for a stable pharmacokinetic profile by relying on drug-target kinetics to attain prolonged efficacy. 7,8,11We believe that the kinetics-based approach to drug discovery provides several key advantages. First, the pharmacokinetic exposure requirement for efficacy is governed by multiple factors which can be easily measured usingin vitroassays (tR,Ki), thus providing a more robust set of parameters for lead optimization than traditional methods that rely on thermodynamic measures alone. Second, there is a suggestion that prolonged target binding results in a higher barrier to resistance. 7,21This would also apply to efflux-mediated resistance, which is particularly relevant in difficult Gram-negative pathogens. 4Third, the kinetics-driven approach has the potential to improve therapeutic indices by maximizing target engagement using minimal compound exposure. Selectivity can be achieved between similarly potent on- and off-targetsviamodulation of the transition-state barrier. To provide an experimental framework for evaluating the relevance of drug-target kinetics toin vivodrug activity, we previously described a mechanistic PK/PD model that coupledin vitrokinetic measurements of drug-target binding with drug PK to predict drug PD. This approach was able to model thein vitroPAE for a series ofpaLpxC inhibitors and to predict the activity of one of these inhibitors in a mouse model ofP. aeruginosainfection. 12LpxC catalyzes the first committed step in the biosynthesis of lipopolysaccharide, an essential component of the Gram-negative bacterial cell wall. To evaluate the ability of this model to predict drug activity in other systems, we chose to study inhibitors of the FabI enzyme in the Gram-positive bacteriumS. aureus. FabI is a component of the bacterial type II fatty acid biosynthesis pathway, and inhibitors ofsaFabI have a static effect on bacterial growth in contrast to thepaLpxC inhibitors which are cidal. ThepaLpxC inhibitors show a correlation between residence time on the enzyme and the magnitude of the PAE observed following compound washout. 12Thus we first selected severalsaFabI inhibitors with a range of residence times, and determined the drug-target kinetic parameters and PAE values at 37 degrees C (Table 1). As observed in the LpxC system, the PAE resulting from thesaFabI inhibitors increases as residence time increases, indicating that prolonged antibacterial activity at low drug concentration is coupled to the life-time of the drug-target complex. However, inFig. 3it can be seen that a steeper correlation exists between residence-time and PAE for thepaLpxC inhibitors (slope 1.3) compared to that ofsaFabI inhibitors (slope 0.27), indicating that drug-target residence time in the LpxC system is translated more strongly to the time-dependent efficacy than in the FabI system. The molecular factors that control the coupling between extended target engagement and time-dependent drug activity play a direct role in determining the sensitivity of a specific target to intervention. In this regard, the rate of protein synthesis will play a key role since the production of new target will dilute the impact of extended target engagement at low drug concentration,22and Narberhauset al. have reported thatpaLpxC is highly stable and thus turns over relatively slowly inP. aeruginosa. 23In addition, the LpxC inhibitors are cidal whereas the FabI inhibitors are static, and growth recovery after exposure to cidal drugs is expected to depend on both the rate of drug-target dissociation and the rate of recovery from downstream events resulting from target engagement. As a result, the PAE depends on both the duration of drug-target interaction as well as the time required for physiological recovery of the process(es) involved in the cidality response. In contrast, static agents are envisioned to induce a dormant growth state, and therefore recovery in this case is anticipated to be primarily dependent upon the rate of drug-target dissociation. The slope of thetRPAE correlation is an indication of the vulnerability of each target to engagement - and thus LpxC is a more vulnerable target than FabI under thein vitrogrowth conditions employed for determining the PAE values. It is also possible to access a more quantitative assessment of target vulnerability by using the model fitting to estimate the minimum and maximum levels of engagement that provide the thresholds for the observed antibacterial activity. As demonstrated in thein vitroPAE measurements, higher concentrations of drug, expressed as fold-MIC, normally result in longer PAEs. This relationship exists because increased drug concentration leads to higher levels of target-occupancy, and that the time required for recovery from the effect of target engagement is longer at higher levels of occupancy. Although global fitting to the PK/PD model calculates the relative target-occupancies at each drug concentration, this process does not explicitly generate the target-occupancy at each drug concentration at the end of the exposure time, nor the minimum and maximum target-occupancy (TOminand TOmax, respectively) that set the threshold limits for the correlation between target occupancy and efficacy which is hypothesized to be linear. This modeling exercise is analogous to the normal sigmoidal correlation that is assumed to exist between drug concentration and effect, where the central section of the sigmoidal curve, which has the largest slope, is approximately linear. 24,25All non-mechanistic traditional PK/PD models use the Hill equation to predict drug efficacy based on the drug concentration at the site of activity. 24,26-28According to this logic, a similar sigmoidal relationship is expected to exist between target-occupancy and drug efficacy. Estimates of TOminand TOmaxwere obtained for inhibitors ofsaFabI andpaLpxC at individual compound concentrations (Table 5). The average values for the TOminand TOmaxvalues for all the inhibitors of each enzyme are plotted inFig. 6where it can be seen that values for both TOminand TOmaxare lower forpaLpxC compared tosaFabI, demonstrating thatpaLpxC is a more vulnerable target thansaFabI. Classification of target vulnerability in the early stages of the drug development pipeline, based on drug-target binding kinetics and PAE measurements, is likely to reduce the rate of attrition in clinical trials and is also likely to provide valuable information for developing suitable dosing strategies. Specifically, for those drugs that interact with a non-vulnerable target or that have a short residence-time, high concentrations of drug will have to be maintained thus reducing the safety window. Conversely, drugs that target vulnerable targets and also have a long residence time, can be dosed less frequently leading to an increase in the therapeutic window. We note, however, that this vulnerability analysis has been conducted based on antibacterial activity measured in culture. While valuable, it is important to note that a similar correlation developed usingin vivoefficacy data would be significantly more appropriate since growth conditions, including pressure from the immune system, can alter target vulnerability. In this regard thesaFabI inhibitorPT119has promisingin vivoefficacy despite poor bioavailability and high protein binding ( greater than 99%), and the conclusion from thein vitrodata analysis that suggest FabI is a low vulnerability target. In this report, we have been able to modelin vivoefficacy data for twoS. aureusFabI inhibitors using the approach that was used previously for an inhibitor of LpxC. 12Given the high quality fits of the model to both the FabI and LpxC inhibitors, it is important to note the differences between these two compound series. In addition to targeting very different enzymes and metabolic pathways (FabI, fatty acid biosynthesis; LpxC, cell envelope), the compounds differ in their mode of inhibition (LpxC, competitive inhibition; FabI, uncompetitive inhibition), type of slow-onset inhibition (one-step for FabI and two-step for LpxC inhibition), static time-kill profile (FabI, bacteriostatic; LpxC, bactericidal) and organism that they target (S. aureus, Gram-positive;P. aeruginosa, Gram-negative). Collectively, these data sets provide a strong argument for the general applicability of the time-dependent pharmacodynamic model. The FabI inhibitorsPT119,PT55andPT447(Fig. 1) were available from previous studies. 18SKTS1was purchased from COSMIC Discoveries (Hyderabad, India) after commissioned synthesis. Cell growth media (Mueller-Hinton broth/agar and Mueller-Hinton agar + 5% defibrinated sheep blood) and chemicals were obtained from commercial vendors. The rational design ofsaFabI inhibitors with improved affinity and/or residence time was based on several structures of the target in complex with NADP+and different diphenyl ether inhibitors. 18,29In order to learn which substituents on the diphenyl ether scaffold might improve enzyme-inhibitor interactions, hot-spot analyses of thesaFabI binding pocket were performed using the program GRID (version 22, Molecular Discovery, Pinner, United Kingdom) and the knowledge-based DrugScoreXpotentials (G. Neudert and G. Klebe, University of Marburg, Germany). 30,31These studies demonstrated that partially lipophilic moieties contacting the Ala97 carbonyl oxygen with a hydrogen-bond donor might be suitable to extend the diphenyl ether scaffold at the 4'-position. Additionally inspired by comparisons with the ligand CG400462 (ref. 32) (Fig. 1) and a crystal structure ofBacillus cereusFabI in complex with a related indole naphthyridinone compound (PDB-code: ;3OJF), we postulated that introduction of a 6-hydroxypyridin-2(1H)-one group at the 4'-position might lead to favorable interactions with the active site (SKTS1). Together with additional candidates for synthesis,SKTS1was docked into thesaFabI binding pocket using our validated docking protocol as described in Schiebelet al. 14,33Briefly, FlexX (version 3.1.3, BioSolveIT, Sankt Augustin, Germany)34was first used to dockSKTS1into the availablesaFabI structures, followed by scoring with DrugScoreX. The putative binding mode and most suitable receptor (in the case ofSKTS1: PDB-code ;4D42) were then selectedviavisual inspection of the top-ranked binding poses. Finally, IC50values were estimated using a FabI-specific empirical scoring function that builds on SFCscore descriptors and was developed specifically for this purpose. 35SKTS1was selected for synthesis due to its high predicted affinity, low log Pvalue and reasonable interactions with the protein. Purity ofSKTS1was confirmed by HPLC and NMR. 1H NMR (400 MHz, acetone-d6) delta ppm 0.87-0.94 (m, 3H), 1.28-1.41 (m, 6H), 1.58-1.68 (m, 2H), 2.55-2.61 (m, 2H), 6.35 (dd,J= 13.87, 7.84 Hz, 2H), 6.73 (dd,J= 8.16, 2.01 Hz, 1H), 6.89-6.95 (m, 4H), 7.06 (d,J= 9.16 Hz, 2H), 7.64 (t,J= 7.91 Hz, 1H). ESI-MS (m/z): calculated for C23H24NO4[M - H]-378.2; found 378.1 [M - H]-. High resolution MS (m/z): calculated for C23H25NO4H [M + H]+380.1856; found 380.1855 [M + H]+; calculated for C23H24NO4[M - H]-378.1711; found 378.1717 [M - H]-. TheStaphylococcus aureusstrains RN4220 and MRSA BAA 1762 were used for the microbiology experiments described below. Kinetic assays were performed on a Cary 100 spectrophotometer (Varian) at 37 degrees C. Reaction velocities were measured by monitoring the oxidation of NADPH to NADP+at 340 nm (epsilon= 6220 M-1cm-1). For jump dilution assays,saFabI (10 muM), inhibitors at concentrations above theirKivalues (?15 muM) and NADP+(500 muM) were incubated overnight at 37 degrees C followed by 1000-fold dilution into the reaction buffer (50 mM potassium phosphate pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 M potassium glutamate, 8% glycerol) containingtrans-2-butenoyl-CoA (1.5 mM) (Sigma, Advent Bio) and NADPH (350 muM). The consumption of NADPH was monitored at 340 nm and the resulting progress curves were fit to eqn (1) using MATLAB 7.0 wherev0is the initial velocity observed in the presence of inhibitor andvfis the final velocity following dissociation of the inhibitor and is equal to the uninhibited enzyme velocity (i.e. v0 less than vf). Eqn (1) yielded the recovery rate-constant (kobs) from which the residence time was estimated (tR? 1/kobs). NoneNoneAnalysis of the jump-dilution data using eqn (1) provided an estimate for the residence time which was subsequently used as a seed value for global fitting of the forward progress curve data to eqn (2)-(4). Note that for the forward progress curve analysis using eqn (2),v0is the initial velocity observed in the presence of inhibitor andvsis the steady state velocity in the presence of inhibitor (i.e. v0 greater than vs). The value ofkoffwas constrained within the limits set by the standard deviation leading to estimates ofkoffandKappi. NoneNoneNoneNoneNoneNoneMIC values were determined with the microbroth dilution assay according to the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute methods for antimicrobial susceptibility tests for aerobically growing bacteria. 36A starter culture of the antibiotic-sensitiveS. aureusstrain RN4220 was grown to log phase (OD600= 0.5; 108CFU mL-1) and diluted 100-fold into cation-adjusted Mueller-Hinton (CAMH) media containing either drug or an equal volume of DMSO. Cultures were then shaken at 37 degrees C for 1 h after which both treated and untreated cells were diluted 1000-fold in fresh CAMH media and again incubated at 37 degrees C. Regrowth was monitored by removing aliquots (0.1 mL) of culture at hourly intervals and plating serial dilutions on Mueller-Hinton agar containing sheep blood. The number of CFUs was then counted following overnight incubation of plates at 37 degrees C. The post-antibiotic effect was calculated as the time in hours required for the number of compound-treated cells (CFUs) to increase 1 log10above the count immediately after dilution minus the time in hours required for the number of cfu's in the control culture to increase by 1 log10above the count immediately after the dilution. 20Pharmacokinetic (PK) studies were conducted in CD-1 miceviasubcutaneous (sc) administration of the test agents in a vehicle of 40% H2O/40% EtOH/20% PEG-400. Plasma samples were collected from animals at eight distinct time points (5 min, 15 min, 30 min, 1 h, 2 h, 4 h, 8 h and 24 h post-injection). Three mice were used per time point. 19Plasma concentrations for each sample were determined by LC/MS/MS using a calibration curve, and the PK parameters were calculated with WinNonlin (Pharsight Corporation, Mountain View, CA, USA). All animals used in this study were maintained in accordance with the American Association for Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care criteria. The experimental protocol for both the PK studies and the pharmacodynamics studies (below) was approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) at Stony Brook University. The animal studies were performed under the protocol "In vivopharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic evaluation of novel antibacterial agents" (IACUC #383230). The free fraction ofPT55andPT119in plasma was determined by rapid equilibrium dialysis using a Thermo ScientificTM Single-Use RED Plate. A solution of each compound was prepared in mouse plasma to match theCmaxdetermined in the PK study (1.82 mug mL-1forPT55and 0.79 mug mL-1forPT119). Then 200 muL of each solution was transferred to the plasma chamber of the Thermo ScientificTM Single-Use RED Plate and PBS was placed in the corresponding buffer chamber. The plate was sealed and incubated at 37 degrees C on an orbital shaker at ?250 rpm for 4 h. Subsequently, the amount of compound in the plasma and buffer samples was determined by LC/MS/MS and the free fraction was calculated by taking the ratio of compound concentration in the buffer and plasma chambers. For pharmacodynamic studies, six-week old, specific-pathogen free, male Swiss Webster mice weighing 27 g to 32 g (Taconic) were used. Mice were rendered neutropenic with IP doses of cyclophosphamide (150 mg kg-1, uid), 4 and 1 day before the infection challenge. Infection was induced by injection ofS. aureus, MRSA (BAA 1762, 106CFU in 50 muL of saline) into the left thigh muscle (IM). Infected neutropenic mice were given a single dose of vehicle or one of the antibacterial agents 1 h post infection by SC injection in the back of the neck. Mice were euthanized by CO2inhalation at 24 h (efficacy), or at different time points post infection (in vivoPAE). Muscle tissue from the infected thighs was collected, weighed and homogenized in 2 mL of saline. Serial dilutions of each homogenized sample were plated on Mueller Hinton II agar containing 5% difibrinated sheep blood. The bacterial burden per gram of thigh muscle was calculated from the number of viable bacteria following overnight incubation at 37 degrees C on agar media. 19To minimize complexity we have used the simple inhibition mechanism shown inScheme 1to derive the appropriate PK/PD model for inhibition ofsaFabI. paLpxC is a single substrate enzyme and inhibitors bind topaLpxC through a competitive two-step induced-fit mechanism. 12In contrast,saFabI catalyzes the NADPH-dependent reduction of an enoyl-ACP substrate through a ternary complex mechanism, and thesaFabI inhibitors bind through a one-step mechanism to the E-NADP+product complex formed during substrate turnover. 18Thus, the ES complex presented inScheme 1represents allsaFabI enzyme-complexes capable of binding to the inhibitor. On this basis, we derived a mechanistic PK/PD model (eqn (1), (S14)None) that incorporates one-step uncompetitive inhibition (see ESINone). 12NoneNoneIn vitrocellular PAE data were obtained at a range of drug concentrations, from 1x MIC to 16x MIC. The PAE data at each drug concentration (three replicates), expressed as CFU mL-1as a function of time, were then globally fit to eqn (5) using initial estimates of the parametersKappi,k4,M(=Km/[S]),pm/Ki,kgrowthandkkillmax. The analysis takes the initial inhibitor concentration as an input value which is assumed to remain constant until the dilution step. The program returns fitted values for these parameters as well as anR2value. In vivotime dependent antibacterial activity was simulated using eqn (5) and using the fitted values from the cellular PAE analysis as input values. In this case the input drug concentration as function of time was obtained from the PK analysis. 12To provide estimates of the minimum (TOmin) and maximum (TOmax) target occupancy required for antibacterial activity, a slope factor (eqn (6)) was added to the PK/PD models used to analyze the inhibition of paLpxC (Walkupet al.) 12andsaFabI (this work) (see ESI eqn (S15)None). TOminis the minimum target occupancy required for activity below which no activity is observed, whereas TOmaxis the maximum occupancy, above which no further increase in activity is observed. Between TOminand TOmaxa linear correlation is assumed to exist between occupancy and drug activity. NoneNoneThe PAE data sets for thepaLpxC inhibitors4,5and6(Fig. 1),11and thesaFabI inhibitorsPT119,PT447andSKTS1, were globally fit to the respective PK/PD models using MATLAB. The resulting output values for the kinetic parameters,kgrowth,kkilland the permeability factor were used as inputs for the TO PK/PD model. The input values were fixed at their initial values and the change in CFU mL-1as a function of time for the PAE phase was analyzed by the TO PK/PD model in Mathematica to find the best fit for each individual concentration of each compound enabling values of TOmin, TOmaxand the initial value for [ES]None, at the beginning of the PAE phase, to be determined. The authors declare no competing financial interest. Click here for additional data file.