NoneNoneInflammatory bowel disease (IBD), including Crohn's disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis, is manifested by chronic inflammation of the gastrointestinal tract with significant morbidity and at times life-threatening complications. NonePatients with chronic CD often develop transmural luminal narrowing and form strictures caused by excessive extracellular matrix deposition. 2,3The mechanisms of intestinal fibrosis are complex and not well understood. Transforming growth factor-beta1 (TGF-beta1) levels are often higher in the mucosa overlying CD strictures compared with nonstrictured gut. NoneTherapies for fibrosis are ineffective, and surgical resection is often required. NoneApproximately 75% of CD patients eventually undergo surgery, most frequently because of intestinal fibrosis. NoneTherapy with anti-tumor necrosis factor alpha (anti-TNFalpha) monoclonal antibodies can effectively reduce inflammation but may not prevent or reverse fibrosis in CD patients. NonePrevious studies also have shown that inhibition of TGF-beta1 reduces colonic fibrosis in a mouse chronic colitis model. NoneAdministration of cathelicidin exerts effective antifibrogenic effects in colitis associated intestinal fibrosis. Cathelicidin inhibits transforming growth factor beta1-induced collagen expression in fibroblasts. The antifibrogenic effect is extracellular-regulated kinase pathway dependent. Cathelicidins (LL-37 in humans and mCRAMP in mice) represent a family of endogenous antimicrobial peptides mediating part of the innate immune response that protects the host from infection. NoneSeveral studies support the importance of cathelicidins in the pathogenesis of various disease states. Cathelicidin-deficient (Camp-/-) mice are more susceptible to infectionsNoneand have reduced angiogenesis and wound healing. 7,8Park et alNonealso showed that LL-37 reduces collagen synthesis in dermal fibroblasts, suggesting a potential role for cathelicidins in reducing fibrosis. Intracolonic administration of mCRAMP reduces the severity of dextran sulfate (DSS)-mediated acute colitis in mice,NoneandCamp-/-mice have exacerbated acute DSS-induced colitis. NoneIn addition, cathelicidin effectively reducesClostridium difficile-mediated colitis and acuteC difficiletoxin A-induced enteritis in mice. NoneDespite its potent anti-inflammatory effects in acute colitis, the potential role of cathelicidin in the development and progress of chronic colitis has not been explored, and the possibility that cathelicidins modulate intestinal fibrosis has never been studied. Here we used the well-established chronic trinitrobenzene sulphonic acid (TNBS)-induced colitis mouse model as well as theSalmonella-mediated cecal inflammation model to study intestinal fibrosis associated with these models. 13,14We found that intracolonic peptide or intravenous lentiviral (LV) administration of cathelicidin attenuates colitis-associated intestinal fibrosis and inflammation in vivo. LL-37 reduces collagen expression induced by TGF-beta1 and insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) in human colonic fibroblasts in vitro. Our results also indicate that reduced collagen expression in response to cathelicidin is mediated via extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) activation in these cells. Human CCD-18Co colonic fibroblasts (2 * 106cells/plate) were cultured in minimal essential medium Eagle's medium (American Type Culture Collection, Manassas, VA) containing 10% fetal bovine serum (Invitrogen/Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA) and 1% penicillin/streptomycin (Invitrogen). NoneHuman primary normal intestinal fibroblasts (three normal and two CD patients) were isolated as previously described elsewhere. NoneCells (2 * 106cells/plate) were cultured in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium containing 10% fetal bovine serum and 1% penicillin/streptomycin and were serum starved overnight before experiments. LL-37 peptide was purchased from Biopeptide (San Diego, CA). TGF-beta1, IGF-1, proinflammatory cytokine cocktail (TNFalpha, IL-1beta, and interferon-gamma, 10 ng/mL each), U0126 (1,4-diamino-2,3-dicyano-1,4-bis[2-aminophenylthio]butadiene) and PD98059 (2-(2'-amino-3'-methoxyphenyl)-oxanaphthalen-4-one) were purchased from Fisher Scientific (Pittsburgh, PA). LL-37, TGF-beta1, IGF-1, and the proinflammatory cytokine cocktail were dissolved in trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) 0.1% as the vehicle solution. PD98059 and U0126 were dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide. Human primary intestinal fibroblasts from normal subjects and CD patients and cultured human colonic CCD-18Co fibroblasts responded to TGF-beta1 and/or IGF-1 differently. Based on preliminary experiments, we used two different conditions (TGF-beta1 alone and TGF-beta1 + IGF-1) to stimulate collagen expression. IGF-1 alone was not sufficient to induce collagen expression in all the fibroblasts we used (data not shown). Camp-/-mice in C57BL/6J strain were obtained from Dr. Richard Gallo at the University of California-San Diego and were bred and maintained at the University of California-Los Angeles (UCLA) animal facility under standard environmental conditions. The animal studies were approved by the animal research committee of UCLA. Chronic TNBS-associated colitis was induced as previously reported elsewhere. 14,15Mice (8-9 weeks old) were injected with TNBS solution or 30% ethanol (50 muL) intracolonically for 5 weeks as illustrated inFigure 1A. Intracolonic administration was achieved by inserting a polyethylene (PE10) catheter 3 cm into rectum under light isoflurane anesthesia. A group of mice were injected with 5 mg/kg of mCRAMP intracolonically every 3 days starting at week 5. Another mouse group were injected withCamp-expressing lentivirus (1 * 107infectious units/mouse) or hemagglutinin (HA)-expressing lentivirus intravenously once, starting at week 5 as illustrated inFigure 6A. Colonic tissues were obtained at week 6 or 7 after carbon dioxide euthanasia. Wild-type mice in 129Sv/J strain were obtained from Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, ME) and were maintained at the UCLA animal facility under standard environmental conditions. Each mouse was administered 20 mg of streptomycin by oral gavage. TheSalmonella typhimuriumSL1344 strain was obtained from Dr. Richard Issacson (University of Minnesota) and was cultured in Lysogeny broth (LB broth) for 48 hours. At 24 hours later, the mice were givenSalmonella typhimuriumSL1344 strain 1 * 108cfu or LB broth in 100 muL by oral gavage as previously described elsewhere. NoneSome groups were injected withCamp-expressing lentivirus (1 * 107infectious units/mouse) or HA lentivirus intravenously once starting on day 11, as illustrated inFigure 8A. Cecal tissues were obtained on day 21 after carbon dioxide euthanasia. The generation of cathelicidin-expressing lentivirus was performed by UCLA vector core facility. Lentivirus-based vectors encoding CRAMP were generated by transient cotransfection of human embryonic kidney 293T (HEK293T) cells with a three-plasmid combination, as described previously elsewhere, with slight modifications. NoneBriefly, 8 * T175 flasks of nonconfluent HEK293T cells were cotransfected with 39 mug pMDLg/pRRE, 21 mug of pMDG (encoding the VSV-G envelope), 15 mug of pRSV-REV, and 60 mug pRRL-CMV-CRAMP-Ires green fluorescent protein (GFP) by the CaPi-DNA coprecipitation method. 18,19The plasmid vectors were kindly provided by Dr. Luigi Naldini (University of Torino, Italy). The next day, the medium was adjusted to make a final concentration of 10 mM sodium butyrate, and the cells were incubated for 5 hours to obtain high-titer virus production as previously described elsewhere. NoneAfter the 5-hour incubation, the cells were washed and incubated in fresh medium without sodium butyrate. Conditioned medium was harvested 16 hours later and passed through 0.45-mm filters. The harvested supernatant was transferred into a centrifuge tube and layered on top of a 10-mL 20% (w/v) sucrose cushion. The tubes were centrifuged using a SW28 rotor (Beckman Coulter, Brea, CA) for 2 hours at 22,000 rpm at 4 degrees C. The virus-containing pellet was resuspended by gentle agitation in an appropriate volume of Dulbecco's phosphate-buffered saline, followed by a short centrifugation step (5 minutes at 16,000g) to pellet debris. Finally, the opaque pellet was transferred to a new tube. The biological titer of the LVs carrying the enhanced green fluorescent protein (eGFP) reporter was analyzed by transduction of HEK293T cells followed by flow cytometry and infectious particles/mL were calculated as previously described elsewhere. NoneMurine colonic tissues were fixed, sectioned, and stained with H E. Microphotographs at 200* magnification were recorded at multiple locations and analyzed by two investigators in a blinded manner, scoring the specimens on a 0-12 scale for chronic TNBS colitis as previously described elsewhere. NoneThe fibrosis score for both TNBS andSalmonellamodels was determined as previously described elsewhere. NoneIn brief, several mucosal and submucosal locations for each Masson trichrome-stained slide were evaluated on a 0-3 scale (0 = no fibrosis, 1 = mild fibrosis, 2 = moderate fibrosis, and 3 = severe fibrosis). The levels of mouse TNF-alpha (DY410), mouse TGF-beta1 (DY1679) and human TGF-beta1 (DY240) of R D Systems (Minneapolis, MN) were measured by the enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay kits according to manufacturer's instructions. Total RNA was isolated with the RNeasy kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA) and reversed transcribed into cDNA by a Superscript III kit (no. 11752; Invitrogen). Quantitative reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) reactions were run with an ABI Prism 7500 Fast sequence detector system (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) as we have previously described elsewhere. NoneThe levels of mRNA were determined by using cataloged primers (Invitrogen) for humanCOL1A2(Hs01028956_m1),CAMP(Hs00189038_m1), mousevimentin(Mm01333430_m1),18S(Hs99999901_s1) and mouseCol1a2(Mm01309565_m1),Camp(Mm00438285_m1),Tgf-beta1(Mm01178820_m1),Tnfalpha(Mm00443259_g1), andGapdh(Mm99999915_g1). Results were expressed as relative fold difference. Staining of collagen deposition of colonic tissue sections was performed by Masson Trichrome staining kit (HT-10; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) and Bouin solution (HT-10132) as previously described elsewhere. NoneFrozen mouse colonic tissues were embedded in optimum cutting temperature solution and fixed in acetone. After incubation with blocking buffer, slides were incubated with primary antibodies including rabbit polyclonal anticollagen sc-28655, rabbit polyclonal anti-PCNA (anti-proliferating cell nuclear antigen) sc-7907, or goat polyclonal antivimentin sc-7557 (1:50 dilution) for 2 hours at room temperature, washed with phosphate-buffered saline and incubated with fluorescent-conjugated secondary antibodies, including donkey anti-rabbit Texas Red sc-2784 and bovine anti-goat FITC sc-2348, for 1 hour (1:100 dilution). Slides were then rinsed and mounted with 4,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) mounting solution. Images were analyzed with a AX10 confocal microscope (Carl Zeiss, Thornwood, NY). Colon tissues were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde and embedded in paraffin. After incubation with blocking buffer, the sections were incubated with a goat polyclonal antivimentin antibody (sc-7557, 1:50 dilution; Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA), a rabbit polyclonal anti-F4/80 antibody (sc-26643-R, 1:50 dilution; Santa Cruz Biotechnology), or a rabbit polyclonal anti-phospho-ERK antibody (no. 4370, 1:50 dilution; Cell Signaling Technologies, Danvers, MA) overnight at 4 degrees C. After washing, the sections were incubated with donkey anti-goat IgG or bovine anti-rabbit IgG, and the slides were stained with an ABC kit for color development (sc-2018; Santa Cruz Biotechnology). Immunohistochemistry was assisted by Translational Pathology Core Laboratory (TPCL) of UCLA. Images were analyzed with a Zeiss AX10 microscope at magnification of 200*. Cells were lysed in radioimmunoprecipitation assay buffer with proteinase inhibitor cocktail (Cell Signaling Technologies). Equal amounts of cell extracts were fractionated by 10% sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, and proteins were transferred onto nitrocellulose membranes (400 mA for 1.5 hours at 4 degrees C; Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA). Membranes were blocked in 5% nonfat milk in TBST (50 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 0.15M NaCl, 0.05% Tween 20), and then were incubated with antibodies against phospho-extracellular signal-regulated kinase (phospho-ERK) (no. 4370), beta-tubulin (no. 2146; Cell Signaling Technologies), phospho-epidermal growth factor receptor (phospho-EGFR) (no. sc12351; Santa Cruz Biotechnology), pro-COL1A1 (no. SP1D8; Development Studies Hybridoma Bank, Iowa City, IA). Horseradish peroxidase-labeled antibodies were detected by chemiluminescence (Fisher Scientific, Pittsburgh, PA), and the signals were captured using the luminescent image analyzer LAS4000 (Fujifilm, Tokyo, Japan). Results were expressed as mean +/- standard error of the mean (SEM) and were analyzed by using the Prism professional statistics software program (GraphPad, San Diego, CA). Unpaired Studentttests were used for intergroup comparisons. Pvalues of statistically significant differences are shown in each figure. We have previously shown that cathelicidins have anti-inflammatory effects against DSS-induced colitis andC difficileinfection in mice. 11,12To investigate the role of cathelicidin in chronic colitis, mice were administered a low dose of TNBS intracolonically every week as previously described elsewhere. 14,15The experimental design of these experiments is illustrated inFigure 1A. After 7 weeks, the body weight of the TNBS-treated mice was statistically significantly lower (P = .045) compared with that of ethanol-treated (control) mice (Figure 1B). Intracolonic administration of the mCRAMP peptide to TNBS-exposed mice restored their body weight loss to levels similar to those of the control mice (P = .0178,Figure 1B). Moreover, chronic TNBS administration induced colonic tissue damage with statistically significantly higher (P = .001) histologic scores compared with the damage induced in control mice (Figure 1CandD). Intracolonic mCRAMP administration statistically significantly reduced the colonic histology score (P = .03) in TNBS-treated mice (Figures 1D). TNBS caused a statistically significant increase of the colonic proinflammatory cytokine tumor necrosis factor alpha (Tnfalpha) mRNA levels (P = .0344;Figure 1E), which were statistically significantly reduced by mCRAMP administration (P = .046,Figure 1E). Intracolonic TNBS also increased colonic Tgf-beta1 mRNA expression; intracolonic administration of cathelicidin did not alter this response (Figure 1F). However, intracolonic mCRAMP did not change the increased colonic F4/80-positive macrophage infiltration in TNBS-treated mice (Figure 2). Thus, intracolonic administration of cathelicidin reduced chronic experimental colitis in an IBD mouse model, consistent with our results in theC difficileinfection model of colitis. NoneIntestinal fibrosis with stricture formation is an important complication in CD patients. NoneWe next evaluated the effect of intracolonic cathelicidin in TNBS colitis-associated colonic fibrosis with Masson trichrome staining for collagen formation. We found increased collagen deposition in the colon of TNBS-treated mice, both in the mucosa and submucosa, compared with control mice (Figure 3A), which was in line with previous observations. 14,15Increased fibrosis was also reflected by an increased fibrosis score (Figure 3B). Moreover, compared with ethanol treatment, chronic TNBS administration increased the collagen Col1a2 mRNA colonic expression (P = .0376,Figure 3C) that was statistically significantly reduced by intracolonic mCRAMP administration (P = .0364,Figure 3C), suggesting antifibrogenic effects. Double immunofluorescence staining showed increased colonic collagen protein expression in and around vimentin-expressing fibroblasts in TNBS-treated mice (Figure 4). Colocalization of collagen and vimentin indicates that fibroblasts are main sources of collagen expression. Intracolonic mCRAMP peptide administration also reduced collagen expression in and around colonic fibroblasts of TNBS-treated mice (Figure 4). On the other hand, cathelicidin-deficient mice showed similar colonic histologic damage (Figure 5AandB), collagen expression (Figure 5CandD), or TNFalpha protein levels (Figure 5E) as the wild-type mice in chronic TNBS colitis. Our data also indicate that expression of endogenous colonic cathelicidin in wild-type mice was not induced during chronic TNBS colitis (Figure 6B). However, intracolonic cathelicidin mCRAMP administration reduced colonic tissue damage (Figure 5AandB) and exerted antifibrogenic effects in TNBS-treatedCamp-/-mice (Figure 5CandD). To further examine the effects of cathelicidin in colitis-associated fibrosis, we injected intravenously cathelicidin-overexpressing lentiviruses and determined their effects in the chronic TNBS-associated model of colitis and colonic fibrosis using the experimental approach shown inFigure 6A. We found that intravenous administration of cathelicidin-expressing lentiviruses increased colonic cathelicidin mRNA levels compared with the injection of control lentiviruses (Figure 6B). Moreover, injection of cathelicidin-overexpressing lentiviruses significantly reduced the histologic damage and histology scores in response to chronic TNBS administration (Figure 6CandD) without affecting the body weight changes in response to TNBS (Figure 6E). Lentiviral overexpression of cathelicidin also inhibited TNBS-induced collagen deposition in the colon, as reflected by a statistically significant reduction in the colonic fibrosis score (P = .0001,Figure 7AandB) and reduced colonic collagen Col1a2 mRNA expression (P = .0497,Figure 7C). Salmonellainduces intestinal inflammation and fibrosis in a TH1 and TH17-dependent manner. NoneThus, we next examined whether injection of LV-overexpressing cathelicidin has any effect onSalmonella-induced fibrosis using the experimental design shown inFigure 8A. Interestingly,Salmonellainfection by itself resulted in increased mRNA levels of cecal cathelicidin (P = .0001;Figure 8B), which was further increased by injection of cathelicidin-expressing lentiviruses in the inflamed cecum (P = .0317,Figure 8B). As shown by H E staining,Salmonellacaused severe cecal inflammation and tissue damage that was reduced by lentiviral cathelicidin expression (Figure 8CandD). Cathelicidin overexpressing lentiviruses also statistically significantly reducedSalmonella-induced proinflammatory cytokine Tnfalpha mRNA expression (P = .0107) (Figure 8E). No change in body weight was observed in any of theSalmonella-infected groups (Figure 9A). Masson trichrome staining indicated strong cecal collagen deposition inSalmonella-infected mice, which was diminished by LV cathelicidin overexpression (Figure 9B), reflected by a statistically significant reduction in the fibrosis score (P = .0001,Figure 9C) and cecal collagen mRNA expression (P = .0251,Figure 9D). Overexpression of cathelicidin inSalmonella-infected mice did not statistically significantly affect cecal Tgf-beta1 mRNA expression (Figure 9E). In the mucosa of CD strictures, TGF-beta1 and IGF-1 stimulate collagen expression in intestinal fibroblasts, leading to fibrosis. NonePrevious studies indicated that TGF-beta1 stimulates collagen synthesis in lung and dermal fibroblasts. NoneTo study the antifibrogenic mechanism of cathelicidin, we coincubated human primary normal intestinal fibroblasts with TGF-beta1 (5 ng/mL) together with human cathelicidin (LL-37, 5 muM). TGF-beta1 alone stimulated procollagen 1A1 protein expression (P = .0001) in human primary normal intestinal fibroblasts after 48 hours (Figure 10AandB). Coincubation with human cathelicidin statistically significantly reduced TGF-beta1-stimulated (P = .0001) procollagen 1A1 protein expression (Figure 10AandB). Similarly, LL-37 statistically significantly inhibited TGF-beta1-stimulated COL1A2 mRNA expression in human primary intestinal fibroblasts (Figure 10C) and also reduced procollagen 1A1 protein expression induced by TGF-beta1 in human primary intestinal fibroblasts isolated from CD patients (Figure 10DandE). Moreover, in cultured human colonic CCD-18Co fibroblasts, cathelicidin inhibited TGF-beta1- and/or IGF-1-induced collagen protein synthesis (Figure 11). ERK activation has been shown to be involved in the antifibrogenic effects of cathelicidin in dermal fibroblasts. NoneWe hypothesized that ERK may represent a pathway modulating the antifibrogenic effects of cathelicidin in primary intestinal fibroblasts. We found that LL-37-induced inhibition of TGF-beta1-mediated collagen protein expression in human primary normal intestinal fibroblasts was partially reversed by pretreatment of cells with the ERK inhibitors PD98059 and U0126 (Figure 12A). Moreover, cathelicidin induced ERK phosphorylation in a concentration-dependent manner regardless of the presence of TGF-beta1 or IGF-1 in human normal primary intestinal fibroblasts (Figure 12B). Consistent with these finding, cathelicidin-induced ERK phosphorylation (addition of EGF serving as a positive control), but not EGFR phosphorylation in human CCD-18Co colonic fibroblasts (Figure 13A). Addition of EGF also augmented the antifibrogenic effects of cathelicidin in both human primary intestinal fibroblasts obtained from CD patients and human CCD-18Co colonic fibroblasts (Figure 13B-E). These results suggest that cathelicidin inhibits fibrogenesis via an ERK-dependent pathway in native human colonic fibroblasts. To confirm cathelicidin mediated ERK activation in vivo, we determined ERK phosphorylation in submucosal tissues of colons and cecum where most fibroblasts are populated. We found the submucosal tissues of normal, TNBS-treated, orSalmonella-infected mice had a low expression of phosphorylated ERK (Figure 14AandB). Both intracolonic mCRAMP peptide administration and intravenousCamp-expressing lentivirus administration activated colonic or cecal ERK phosphorylation in the TNBS orSalmonellamodel of intestinal fibrosis (Figure 14AandB). We and others have previously shown that the antimicrobial peptide cathelicidin possesses potent anti-inflammatory activities against acute intestinal inflammation. 10,11,12Consistent with these findings, our results using the models of chronic TNBS colitis andSalmonellainfection and two different approaches-intracolonic administration of cathelicidin peptide and intravenous injection of cathelicidin-expressing lentiviruses-demonstrate that cathelicidin exerts significant anti-inflammatory effects, including reduction of mucosal Tnfalpha protein or mRNA expression (Figures 1E,5E, and8E). Both approaches also lead to substantial improvement of histologic evidence of colitis in both animal models (Figures 1D,5B,6D, and8D). Taken together with previous findings,10,11,12our results demonstrate a role for exogenous administration of cathelicidin against both acute and chronic IBD-related colitis as well as infectious colitis of different etiologies. Most importantly, we report here that cathelicidin inhibits colitis-associated colonic fibrosis in chronic TNBS andSalmonellainfection models in vivo and in human intestinal fibroblasts in vitro, suggesting that exogenous cathelicidin may represent an effective approach in inhibiting colitis-associated fibrosis. The role of antimicrobial peptides or proteins, including cathelicidins, in colitis-associated intestinal fibrosis or stricture formation has never been reported. We report here that cathelicidin inhibits colitis-associated colonic fibrosis in vivo and substantially reduces TGF-beta1- and/or IGF-1-mediated collagen protein synthesis in human intestinal fibroblasts isolated from three normal subjects and two CD patients (Figure 10A-E) as well as in human colonic CCD-18Co fibroblasts (Figure 11). In rats, systemic blockade of putative cathelicidin receptor P2X7 by A740003 [N-(1-([(cyanoimino)(5-quinolinylamino) methyl] amino)-2,2-dimethylpropyl)-2-(3,4-dimethoxyphenyl)acetamide] and brilliant blue G prevented TNBS-induced colitisNonewhile A438079 [3-[[5-(2,3-dichlorophenyl)-1H-tetrazol-1-yl]methyl]pyridine], another P2X7 inhibitor, reduced mouse liver fibrosis. NoneAnother putative cathelicidin receptor formyl peptide receptor-like 1 (FPRL1) was found to mediate LL-37-induced collagen production in human lung fibroblasts. NoneHowever, the antifibrogenic effect of LL-37 in human intestinal fibroblasts was not altered by pretreatment with the FPRL1 antagonist WRW4 or the P2X7 antagonist KN62 (data not shown), suggesting that the antifibrogenic effects of cathelicidin do not depend on these two putative cathelicidin receptors. This antifibrogenic effect likely involves an ERK-dependent mechanism as it can be blocked by the mitogen-activated protein kinase 1 (MEK1) inhibitor PD98059 and the MEK1/2 inhibitor U0126 (Figure 12A). Cathelicidin induces ERK phosphorylation in human normal intestinal fibroblasts and human CCD-18Co colonic fibroblasts (Figures 12Band13A). Specifically, the effects of cathelicidin in collagen synthesis appear to be mediated by MEK1, as the MEK1 inhibitor PD98059 was sufficient to reverse LL-37-mediated suppression of TGF-beta1-induced collagen synthesis (Figure 12A). These results confirm that the antifibrogenic effects of cathelicidin in intestinal fibroblasts are ERK-dependent and are consistent with a previous report demonstrating that the antifibrogenic mechanism of cathelicidin in dermal fibroblasts involves ERK activation. NoneCathelicidin did not affect protein expression of the fibrogenic TGF-beta1 in CCD-18Co colonic fibroblasts, even in the presence of a proinflammatory cytokine cocktail (TNFalpha, IL-1beta, and interferon-gamma) (Figure 15AandB). Moreover, intracolonic cathelicidin administration or injection of cathelicidin-overexpressing lentiviruses did not affect intestinal TGF-beta1 mRNA expression in both TNBS andSalmonellafibrosis mouse models (Figures 1Fand9E). These results suggest that the antifibrogenic effects of cathelicidin are independent of the classic TGF-beta1-mediated profibrogenic events. On the other hand, cathelicidin treatment did not induce fibroblast cell proliferation in vitro, and did not affect colonic or cecal expression of the fibroblast marker vimentin expression (data not shown) and proliferating cell nuclear antigen staining (Supplementary Figure 1) in our in vivo models. We did not observe colonic apoptosis (terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated deoxyuridine triphosphate nick-end labeling assay) after intracolonic or intravenous cathelicidin administration (data not shown), suggesting that cathelicidin is unlikely to cause tissue damage in the intestine. Despite the positive antifibrogenic effects of cathelicidin administration, TNBS-treated cathelicidin-deficient mice did not show additional colonic fibrosis or tissue damage compared with TNBS-treated wild-type mice (Figure 5). The lack of increased endogenous cathelicidin expression (Figure 6B) may be related to low levels of inflammation seen in this chronic TNBS-induced model as reflected by low colonic TNFalpha protein level (Figure 5E). Colonic TNFalpha levels were similar among TNBS treated wild-type andCamp-/-mice (Figure 5E). Although colonic cathelicidin mRNA expression is increased in acute DSS-induced colitis,Noneintestinal cathelicidin mRNA expression is not altered in CD patients. NoneSeveral studies have underlined the importance of the bacterial composition of the intestinal flora in IBD pathophysiology and epithelial barrier integrity. Along these lines, the ability of cathelicidin to alter the gut microflora may be associated with the antifibrogenic effects reported here. 10,11Because the microflora composition associated with intestinal fibrosis has not been identified in animal or human colon, future studies are necessary to explore this possibility. In summary, our report provides novel evidence for an antifibrogenic effect of cathelicidin in vivo and in vitro. Our results strongly suggest that cathelicidin administration may be a novel approach to prevent or treat IBD, and IBD-related colonic fibrosis.