Rotaviruses (RVs) are eleven-segmented, double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) viruses and important causes of acute gastroenteritis in humans and other animal species (Estes, 2007). Despite their medical significance, critical gaps in knowledge exist about how RVs replicate within infected host cells. In particular, the mechanism by which RVs synthesize their dsRNA genome segments during the early stages of virion particle assembly is poorly understood (Guglielmi et al., 2010;Patton et al., 2007;Trask et al., 2012a). The coupling of genome replication with assembly may have evolved to ensure that the viral dsRNA remains sequestered away from cellular antiviral sentries during infection (Zinzula and Tramontano, 2013). Yet, this concerted assembly-replicase process has been difficult to study in the context of infected cells because it occurs within electron-dense cytosolic inclusions called viroplasms (Eichwald et al., 2004;Fabbretti et al., 1999;Patton et al., 2006). When viewed by transmission electron microscopy (EM) in negatively-stained, resin-embedded cell sections, complexes located within the boundaries of viroplasms cannot be resolved (Altenburg et al., 1980;Eichwald et al., 2012;Saif et al., 1978;Suzuki et al., 1981). High-resolution structures have been determined for several of the viral proteins involved in RV genome replication and assembly, as well as for intact RV triple-layered particles (TLPs) and double-layered particles (DLPs) (Aoki et al., 2009;Chen et al., 2009;Dormitzer et al., 2002;Jayaram et al., 2002;Li et al., 2009;Lu et al., 2008;McClain et al., 2010;Rodriguez et al., 2014;Settembre et al., 2011;Zhang et al., 2008). The mature RV TLP is non-enveloped, ~80-100-nm in diameter, and comprised of three capsid layers with icosahedral symmetry. The outermost layer (T=13) of the TLP is formed mostly by the VP7 glycoprotein and is embedded with 60 trimers of the protease-sensitive VP4 spike attachment protein. This outer VP7-VP4 layer is shed during viral entry into the host cell, revealing a DLP, which is deposited into the cytosol. The intermediate layer (T=13) of the TLP and outer layer of the DLP is made up of VP6. Beneath VP6 resides a thin, smooth VP2 core shell (T=1), which directly encases eleven dsRNA genome segments as well as several copies each of the viral RNA polymerase (VP1) and RNA capping enzyme (VP3). Although the structural details of the RV particle interior are not fully resolved, it is thought that VP1 and VP3 form a heterodimer situated beneath most if not all of the fivefold icosahedral vertices (Estrozi et al., 2013;Prasad et al., 1996). During RV transcription in the context of a DLP, VP1 proteins simultaneously synthesize eleven non-polyadenylated plus-strand RNAs (+RNAs) using the minus-strands of dsRNAs as templates (Jayaram et al., 2004;Trask et al., 2012a). Nascent +RNAs acquire a 5' me7G cap via the activities of VP3 prior to their extrusion from the DLP through aqueous channels at or near the fivefold vertices (Lawton et al., 1997). In addition to serving as templates for protein synthesis by cellular ribosomes, +RNAs are also templates for genome replication. Specifically, viral +RNAs are selectively assorted and packaged into assembly-replication intermediates (RIs), where they are converted into dsRNAs by a single round of VP1-mediated minus-strand RNA synthesis. However, very little is known about the macromolecular architectures of RV RIs, including that of the viral replicase complex. The limited insight that we have into the organization and composition of RV RIs is mainly based upon early biochemical studies. In 1986, Helmberger-Jones and Patton showed that a subcellular fraction of infected monkey kidney cells, called a subviral particle (SVP) preparation, can be prepared using differential centrifugation and sucrose gradient fractionation (Helmberger-Jones and Patton, 1986). Upon incubation of this SVP preparation with nucleotides (NTPs) and divalent cations (Mg2+and Mn2+) at greater than =30 degrees C, minus-strand RNA synthesis occurs on eleven endogenous +RNAs to produce dsRNA genome segmentsin vitro. This result indicates that the SVP preparation is enriched for functional viral replicase complexes. In addition to the viral RNA polymerase and RNA capping enzyme (i.e., VP1 and VP3), the preparation was also suggested to include the VP2 core shell protein, the VP6 middle virion layer protein, two multifunctional nonstructural proteins (NSP2 and NSP5), as well as numerous unspecified cellular proteins. The RV RIs in the SVP preparation are heterogeneous, as they are captured at different stages of assembly and/or minus-strand RNA synthesis. However, Gallegos and Patton showed that an RI population with maximal replicase activity, called core RIs, can be resolved using non-denaturing Tris-glycine agarose gel electrophoresis (Gallegos and Patton, 1989). The replicase-competent core RI population was suggested to contain the same viral proteins as the SVP preparation (i.e., VP1, VP2, VP3, VP6, NSP2, and NSP5). However, in these early studies, the protein composition of SVPs and gel-purified core RIs was not confirmed by immunoblot analyses, and the particles within the preparations were not directly visualized using EM. Based solely upon its biochemical attributes before and after genome replication, Patton and Gallegos made some predictions about the ultrastructure of the RV replicase complex (Patton and Gallegos, 1990). Specifically, prior to being subjected toin vitrominus-strand RNA synthesis, core RIs migrated more slowly in the agarose gels than did TLPs and DLPs, and they were exquisitely sensitive to inactivation by RNases. In contrast, afterin vitrogenome replication, core RIs migrated more quickly in the gels, and they were more resistant to RNase inactivation. These results led Patton and Gallegos to hypothesize that the RV replicase complex began as a greater than 100-nm particle with +RNA replication templates extending away from its VP2-VP6 capsid surface (Patton and Gallegos, 1990). During minus-strand RNA synthesis, the +RNAs were predicted to be "pulled into" the particle interior, thereby condensing the complex to less than 50-nm in diameter and protecting the +RNA templates. In the current study, we sought to employ EM to visualize, for the first time, complexes found in both the replicase-competent SVP preparation and in the gel-purified, replicase-competent core RI population. Our EM imaging data suggest a new model for the ultrastructure of the viral replicase complex, and they raise important questions about the interactions among viral proteins and RNA during the early stages of RV particle assembly. To isolate the subcellular fraction of infected cells containing all RV RIs (i.e., the SVP preparation) we used an approach described by Helmberger-Jones and Patton (Helmberger-Jones and Patton, 1986). Mock-infected or strain SA11 simian RV-infected monkey kidney (MA104) cells were lysed at 10 hours post-infection (p.i.) using a Dounce homogenizer, and the lysates were clarified by low-speed centrifugation. Large particulate in the cell supernatant were then pelleted thru a 15-30% sucrose gradient by ultracentrifugation. The pellet was resuspended, and a small amount was analyzed for protein content using sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) (Fig. 1A). The results showed that the subcellular fractions derived from mock-infected and RV-infected cells contained numerous cellular proteins of unknown identity. However, prominent protein bands consistent with the molecular masses of several viral proteins were also detected in the SVP preparation. Immunoblot analyses confirmed the identities of viral proteins VP1 (125 kDa), VP2 (102 kDa), VP6 (45 kDa), NSP2 (35 kDa), NSP3 (35 kDa), and NSP5 (30-34 kDa) (Fig. S1A). Unfortunately, we lacked antisera to detect VP3 (98 kDa), VP4 (86 kDa), VP7 (37 kDa), and NSP4 (20-28 kDa) by immunoblot. To determine whether the SVP preparation contained active replicase complexes, an aliquot was incubated at 30 degrees C along with NTPs, divalent cations, and [32P]-UTP. No exogenous +RNA templates were added to the reaction, requiring VP1 to utilize associated +RNA templates forin vitrominus-strand RNA synthesis. The [32P]-labeled dsRNA products of the reaction were recovered using phenol-chloroform extraction, and then they were separated by SDS-PAGE (Fig. 1B). The results showed that all eleven [32P]-labeled dsRNA gene segments were detected in the gel for the reaction containing the SVP preparation, suggesting that VP1 elongated associated +RNA templates. These results indicate that we isolated an impure subcellular fraction of RV-infected cells that contains viral replicase complexes. To visualize the ultrastructures of complexes in the subcellular fractions, diluted aliquots were added onto glow-discharged, carbon-coated EM grids. The complexes on the grids were negatively stained, and then they were imaged at 40,000* magnification using a transmission EM (Fig. 1C-H). As controls, grids containing purified TLPs, DLPs, and cores (i.e., DLPs with VP6 removed) were also prepared (Fig. 1I-J). For the mock subcellular fraction, only ~50-200-nm cloud-shaped complexes were visualized (Fig. 1C). These same cloud-shaped complexes were also seen on the grids prepared with the SVP preparation. However, many unique complexes were also visualized in the SVP preparation, which were not found in the mock-infected control fraction (Fig. 1D-H). As expected, ~80-100-nm particles resembling TLPs and DLPs were detected (Fig. 1D-G and Fig.1 J-K). Also, ~15-nm doughnut-shaped proteins resembling NSP2 octamers were seen either as free complexes (Fig. 1D) or associated in strings (Fig. 1F), possibly bound to single-stranded RNA or bound to each other (Hu et al., 2012). Even more, in the SVP preparation, we also detected dispersed pebble-shaped complexes, which were ~20 nm in diameter (Fig. 1E). Interestingly, these pebble-shaped complexes were visually indistinguishable from those that appeared to be released from disrupted virion-derived cores (Fig. 1L). Finally, in the SVP preparation, we also detected ~30-70 nm particle-shaped complexes with electron-dense centers (Fig. 1G-H). These particles were distinct in both in their sizes and morphologies from TLPs, DLPs, and cores (Fig. 1J-L). They also appeared to vary in relative size compared with each other (i.e., small vs. large particle-shaped complexes). Together, the EM images provided a first glimpse of complexes in the SVP preparation. Having observed ~15-nm doughnut-shaped proteins arranged as strings in the SVP preparation (Fig. 2A), we next sought to determine whether they were NSP2 octamers bound to single-stranded RNA. To test this idea, we employed purified,E. coli-expressed recombinant NSP2 (rNSP2) protein (Fig. S2). Specifically, rNSP2 was either added alone onto EM grids (Fig. 2B), or it was combined with actively-transcribing DLPs prior to being added to the grids (Fig. 2C). The complexes were then negatively stained and imaged using EM. On the grids with rNSP2 alone, only dispersed, doughnut-shaped structures (i.e., rNSP2 octamers) were visualized (Fig. 2B). However, on the grids for which rNSP2 was combined with transcribing DLPs, we saw darkly-stained strings that appeared to be attached to the DLPs (Fig. 2C). No such strings were seen in control DLP transcription reactions lacking ATP (Fig. S2). To further investigate the nature of the NSP2-RNA complexes, we prepared viral gene 8 +RNAin vitro(Fig. S2) and imaged it alone (Fig. 2D) or in combination with rNSP2 (Fig. 2E). Again, darkly-stained strings were only detected when rNSP2 and +RNA were combined; these strings disappeared following RNase A-treatment, revealing dispersed rNSP2 octamers (Fig. 2F). This same result was found when non-viral, single-stranded RNA was used instead of gene 8 +RNA (data not shown). These data are consistent with the known single-stranded RNA-binding properties of octameric NSP2 (Jiang et al., 2006;Taraporewala et al., 1999) and support the notion that the strings in the SVP preparation likely represented native NSP2-+RNA complexes. We next wanted to investigate the composition and features of the ~20-nm pebble-shaped complexes that were seen in the SVP preparation and that were released from disrupted virion-derived cores (Fig. 1E, 1L, and3A). To test whether the integrity of the pebble-shaped complexes was dependent upon the presence of intact RNA, we treated the core preparation with RNase A prior to preparing grids for negative staining and EM imaging. The results showed that no pebble-shaped complexes could be detected following RNase A treatment, but that the VP2 core shells were still visible (Fig. 3B). This result suggests that the pebble-shaped complexes were likely comprised of several smaller proteins held together by RNA. To determine whether the ~20-nm pebble-shaped complexes contained VP1 and/or VP3, we employed an immunoaffinity-capture EM approach (Fig. 3C-H). Specifically, EM grids were functionalized and decorated with either alpha-VP1, alpha-VP3, or control (alpha-NSP3) antisera. The grids were then incubated with either the SVP preparation or the core preparation. Both alpha-VP1 and alpha-VP3 recognize conformational epitopes, as they immunoprecipitated 125-kDa and 98-kDa proteins, respectively from infected cell lysate (Fig. S3). As such, only complexes with accessible VP1 or VP3 would be captured onto the EM grids in this experiment; untethered proteins would be washed away prior to negative staining and EM imaging. The results showed that ~20-nm pebble-shaped complexes were only visualized on the EM grids containing alpha-VP1 (Fig. 3C-D) or alpha-VP3 and (Fig. 3F-G). No complexes were found on grids prepared with a control antibody (Fig. 3E-H). It is important to note that, in addition to capturing ~20-nm pebble-shaped complexes, both alpha-VP1 and alpha-VP3 also captured larger, amorphous complexes from the SVP preparation (Fig. 3F-G). In particular, alpha-VP3 captured more of these larger complexes from the SVP preparation than it did the ~20-nm pebble-shaped complexes. This result suggests that VP3 may be a component of several types of higher-ordered protein complexes in RV-infected cells. Due to the degree of heterogeneity of complexes captured on alpha-VP3 grids, they were not analyzed further in the current study. To better understand the features of the ~20-nm pebble-shaped, VP1-VP3 complexes in more detail, we created class averages using ~300 particles from each grid and the computational software program SPIDER (Frank et al., 1996;Shaikh et al., 2008). The results showed that the complex was ~20-nm wide * ~20-nm tall with distinctive face-like characteristics (Fig. 3I-K). The dimensions of the complex were identical regardless of whether it was captured using alpha-VP1 vs. alpha-VP3; yet, the orientation was slightly different depending upon the antibody or protein preparation used (Fig. 3I-K). Thus, the VP1-VP3 complex may have been captured in different positions or in different structural states. We next wanted to determine whether the ~30-70-nm electron-dense particles visualized in the SVP preparation represented replicase-competent core RIs. To do this, we employed a non-denaturing Tris-glycine agarose gel procedure similar to that described by Patton and Gallegos for the purification of core RIs (Patton and Gallegos, 1990). Following electrophoresis and Gel Code Blue staining of the SVP preparation, a distinct band corresponding to core RIs was seen ~0.5-cm above TLPs (Fig. 4A). This band was excised from parallel, unstained gel lanes, and the core RIs were electro-eluted from the gel slice. The gel-purified core RIs were then assayed for the capacity to mediatein vitrominus-strand RNA synthesis following RNase A-treatment or mock-treatment (Fig. 4B). The results demonstrated that the gel-purified complexes are replicase-competent and sensitive to inactivation by RNase A. A slightly different [32P]-labeled dsRNA band pattern was observed for the core RI reaction (Fig. 4B) as compared to the SVP reaction (Fig. 1B). It is possible that this difference is related to dsRNA degradation occurring in the core RI preparation. SDS-PAGE and silver staining showed that the core RI preparation is comprised of proteins with the molecular masses ~125-kDa, ~100-kDa, ~98 kDa, ~45 kDa, and ~35 kDa (Fig. 4C). Immunoblot analyses confirmed the presence of VP1, VP2, VP6 and NSP2 in the core RI preparations (Fig. S1B); we did not detect NSP3 or NSP5 by immunoblot (data not shown). Unfortunately, we lack antisera to detect VP4 (86 kDa) and VP7 (37 kDa), which may co-migrate in the gel with VP3 (98 kDa) and VP7 (35 kDa), respectively. Aliquots of the replicase-competent, gel-purified core RIs were next added onto glow-discharged, carbon-coated EM grids and negatively stained for ultrastructural analyses (Fig. 5A). The results showed that the gel-purified core RIs actually represented a population of particles that varied in both their sizes and morphologies. Small core RI particles, less than =45 nm in diameter exhibited thick ringed borders and electron-dense centers. Large core RI particles ranged from ~46-70 nm in diameter and had more detailed features in their outer capsid layer as compared to the small core RI particles, but still had electron-dense centers. DLP-like particles were greater than =71 nm in diameter and visually indistinguishable from DLP controls with "rough" capsids. TLP-like particles were greater than =71 nm in diameter and visually indistinguishable from TLP controls, with "smooth" capsids. The electron-dense centers of the small and large core RI particles suggested either (i) that they collapsed during the staining and drying procedure, such that the metal stain "pooled" in the middle of flattened spheres or (ii) that they contained stain-accessible viral RNA. To distinguish between these two possibilities, we used a thicker (~100 nm) stain layer, which embeds fragile particles and prevents them from complete collapse (Fig. 5B). The resulting EM images showed that both the small and large core RI particles still had electron-dense centers following thick staining, suggesting that they are RNA-rich and permeable. In further support of this idea, RNase A-treatment of the gel-purified core RI preparation abolished the visual presence of both the small and large core RI particles; only DLP-like and TLP-like particles could be seen on the grids following RNase A-treatment (data not shown). To better understand the distribution of the particle types (i.e., small core RI, large core RI, DLP-like, and TLP-like) in the gel-purified core RI population, MATLAB imaging software was employed (Fig. 6). For this experiment, images were taken at random from several EM grids, and the diameters of particles in each image were computationally determined. The results showed that the particles had a range of diameters from less than 20-nm to greater than 76-nm. Particles with diameters consistent with those of small and large core RIs comprised 43% and 51% of the population, respectively. Thus, 94% of the gel-purified core RI population was made up of these RNA-rich, RNase-sensitive particles. Only 6% of the population had diameters greater than =71 nm, consistent with the DLP-like and TLP-like particles, suggesting that they represented a minor fraction of the population. In support of this notion, the proteins of the core RI preparation, but not a control TLP preparation, were found to be quite sensitive to trypsin proteolysis (Fig. S4), suggesting that the preparation is mostly comprised of these unique "accessible" particles. We hypothesize that the small and large core RI particles represent RV replicase complexes; yet, the continuum of particle diameters suggests that these replicase complexes were captured at various stages of genome replication and/or assembly. The observation that RV genome replication is connected to the early stages of virion particle assembly was made over 25 years ago (Patton and Gallegos, 1988). Since then, however, little progress has been made in elucidating the macromolecular architectures of RV RIs, including that of the viral replicase complex. RV RIs are difficult to visualize by EM in negatively stained, resin-embedded cell sections due to the electron-dense nature of viroplasms. Moreover, it is challenging to resolve RV RIs by light microscopy because of their small size and proximity to unassembled viral proteins. Therefore, in the current study, we used biochemical methods to remove RV RIs from the confines of viroplasms and then study their ultrastructures by EM. We first imaged complexes in an impure, replicase-competent, subcellular fraction of RV-infected cells called the SVP preparation. Three never-before-seen complexes were found in this preparation: (i) ~15-nm doughnut-shaped proteins associated in strings, (ii) ~20-nm pebble-shaped complexes, and (iii) ~30-70 nm particle-shaped complexes with electron-dense centers. By performingin vitroreconstitution, immunoaffinity capture, and non-denaturing agarose gel purification, we were able to investigate the composition and general EM ultrastructures of these three unique complexes. The results of this study shed light on the macromolecular architecture of native RV RIs, including that of the putative replicase complex, and they raise new questions about the interactions among viral proteins and RNA during the concerted assembly-replicase process. EM imaging of the SVP preparation andin vitroreconstituted complexes revealed (i) that NSP2 octamers bound to single-stranded RNAs to form darkly-stained strings and (ii) that the darkly-stained strings were often proximal to DLPs, which represent the source of +RNA transcripts during infection. Based on these observations, we hypothesize that NSP2 binds to nascent +RNAs as they egress from the transcriptase complex (i.e., the DLP) and then chaperones these +RNAs to the replicase complex (i.e., the core RI) so that they can serve as templates for VP1-mediated minus-strand RNA synthesis. This hypothesis is consistent with the known capacity of octameric NSP2 to bind to single-stranded RNA and with the phenotype of temperature-sensitive NSP2 mutant RVs, which lose their ability to synthesize dsRNA and produce empty virus particles at non-permissive temperatures (Chen et al., 1990;Ramig and Petrie, 1984;Taraporewala et al., 1999). NSP2 is a multifunctional protein that plays numerous, albeit poorly characterized, roles during the RV lifecycle. As a recombinant protein, NSP2 exhibits nucleotide triphosphatase, nucleoside diphosphate kinase, and helix destabilizing activities (Carpio et al., 2004;Kumar et al., 2007;Taraporewala and Patton, 2001;Vasquez-Del Carpio et al., 2006). In addition to binding single-stranded RNA, this nonstructural protein also interacts with NSP5 and microtubules to nucleate viroplasm formation in the infected cell cytosol (Cabral-Romero and Padilla-Noriega, 2006;Criglar et al., 2014;Eichwald et al., 2004;Fabbretti et al., 1999). Moreover, NSP2 is a component of the replicase-competent core RI population, and it directly engages both VP1 and VP2 (Viskovska et al, 2014). The 280-kDa NSP2 octamer is comprised of eight 35-kDa monomeric subunits that form a doughnut-shape with a 35-A central hole (Jayaram et al., 2002). Both single-stranded RNA and NSP5 bind the deep, positively charged grooves that line the two-fold axes of the octamer (Jiang et al., 2006). Recently, Viskovska et al. used peptide mapping to show that these grooves may also encompass VP1- and VP2- interaction interfaces (Viskovska et al, 2014). As such, NSP2 interactions with +RNA, NSP5, VP1, and VP2 must be temporally or spatially regulated, perhaps as a result of NSP2 phosphorylation (Criglar et al., 2014). It is interesting to speculate that +RNA becomes displaced from the NSP2 octamer by VP1- or VP2-binding in the context of the replicase complex (i.e., the small or large core RI). In addition to releasing +RNA, NSP2 engagement of VP1 and VP2 may serve to prevent premature initiation of minus-strand RNA synthesis and/or premature capsid enclosure. Still, such binding of NSP2 to VP1 and/or VP2 must be transient, as NSP2 is a viral nonstructural protein and must be removed some time during the core RI to DLP transition. In the SVP preparation, we also visualized ~20-nm pebble-shaped complexes, which were strikingly similar to those that appeared to be released from virion-derived cores. It has long been presumed, though never directly proven, that VP1 and VP3 form a heterodimer at most if not all of the icosahedral fivefold vertices of the core (Trask et al., 2012b). Moreover, each VP1-VP3 complex is thought to be dedicated to a single genome segment. In this manner, virion-derived cores would contain eleven VP1-VP3 complexes, each bound to a single dsRNA molecule. Consistent with this idea, we found that the ~20-nm pebble-shaped complexes from the core preparation were RNase-sensitive and could be captured with alpha-VP1 and alpha-VP3. Computational averaging revealed that the VP1-VP3 complex is ~20-nm wide * ~20-nm tall with distinctive face-like characteristics. Interestingly, the orientation of the VP1-VP3 complex was slightly different when it was captured using alpha-VP1 vs. alpha-VP3, suggesting that the two antibodies bind it at different positions. Moreover, the features of the complex were also different when it was captured from the SVP preparation using alpha-VP1. As such, the complex may be in different structural states in the different protein preparations. For instance, while the core preparation contains the VP1-VP3 complex post-genome replication, the SVP preparation may contain the VP1-VP3 complex associated with +RNA and/or NSP2 just prior to assortment or genome replication. Ongoing experiments in our laboratories are investigating the stoichiometry of VP1 and VP3 in this complex, as well as determining higher-resolution structures using single-particle computational approaches. Although alpha-VP1 and alpha-VP3 enriched for the ~20-nm pebble-shaped complexes from the SVP preparation, additional, larger complexes were also captured with these antibodies. At this time, we do not know if these larger complexes are simply proteins that were bound non-specifically by the antibodies or if they represent authentic, functional VP1- and/or VP3-containing assemblies. One possibility is that these larger complexes are pre-core RIs, which were described by Patton and Gallegos to be comprised of VP1, VP3, NSP2, and NSP5 (Patton and Gallegos, 1990). Another possibility is that the RNA capping enzyme is a component of macromolecular assemblies other than just those that are packaged into the core. In support of this notion, Zhang et al. showed that VP3 can cleave cellular 2',5'-oligoadenylate synthetase to abrogate the cellular immune response (Zhang et al., 2013). As such, VP3 may form higher-ordered complexes with other viral and/or cellular proteins to antagonize the host innate immune response. Our EM imaging data showed that the SVP preparation contained unique ~30-70 nm particle-shaped complexes whose sizes and morphologies were different from TLPs, DLPs, and cores. To test the hypothesis that these unique particles were the viral replicase complex, we employed a core RI gel purification method that was described by Patton and Gallegos (Patton and Gallegos, 1990). A distinct, slow-migrating band was excised following gel electrophoresis of the SVP preparation. Unlike the results of Patton and Gallegos, however, we did not detect any faster migrating bands (i.e., those that might have corresponded to pre-core RIs). Moreover, in our experiments, we employed electro-elution to remove the core RI complexes from the gel slices because the glass wool extraction method prevented clear visualization of the particles by EM. Still, consistent with those previous studies, we demonstrated that our gel-purified core RI complexes were replicase competent, and contain many of the same proteins (VP1, VP2, VP3, VP6, and NSP2) found by Patton and Gallegos. However, unlike the previous report, we found no detectable NSP5 in our core RI preparations. When we visualized the gel-purified core RI population by EM, we mostly found the ~30-70 nm electron-dense particles originally seen in the SVP preparation. Yet, the particles were heterogeneous in both their sizes and morphologies. The small core RI particles exhibited thick, ringed borders and electron-dense centers, while the large core RI particles had more detailed features in their outer capsid layer as compared to the small core RI particles. Both the small and large core RI particles were permeable to metal stain and were sensitive to destruction by RNase A. These attributes are most consistent with the small and large core RIs being RV replicase complexes. Particles resembling DLPs or TLPs (i.e., DLP- and TLP-like particles) were also found in the gel purified population, but only at low levels. These particles were most co-migrated with the small and large core RIs in the agarose gel, perhaps because they were physically bound "sticky" core RIs. The EM ultrastructures of the putative replicase complexes are different than what was predicted based upon the biochemical studies of Patton and Gallegos (Patton and Gallegos, 1990At this time, it is not clear how the various particles in the core RI population differ regarding their protein composition. Immunoaffinity-capture experiments using alpha-NSP2 and alpha-VP6 did not differentiate one particle type over another (data not shown). As such, the transition from a small core RI to a large core RI to a DLP may be gradual and comprised of very subtle changes in protein stoichiometry. Ongoing experiments in our laboratories are employing biochemical methods to further fractionate the core RI population so that we can better understand the dynamic ultrastructure and composition of the RV replicase complex. Such work is significant, because it will provide a structural basis for mechanistic work aimed at unraveling the concerted assembly-replicase process of RVs. Simian RV strain SA11 (4F derivative, provided by Dr. John T. Patton, National Institutes of Health) was used to infect monkey kidney MA104 clone 1 cells (American Type Culture Collection) as described byArnold et al., 2009(Arnold et al., 2009). Cells were sub-cultured at 37 degrees C and 5% CO2in Medium 199 (Life Technologies) supplemented to contain 0.25 ug/ml Amphotericin B, 100 U/ml penicillin, 100 ug/ml streptomycin, and 10% fetal bovine serum. SA11 was activated prior to infection by incubation at 37 degrees C for 1 hour in 10 ug/ml of porcine pancreatic type IX trypsin (Sigma Aldrich). SA11 TLPs and DLPs were purified by isopycnic centrifugation in cesium chloride at a density of 1.36 g/cm3and 1.38 g/cm3, respectively, as described previously (Bican et al., 1982). Virions were dialyzed against TNC (20 mM Tris pH 8.0, 100 mM NaCl, 1 mM CaCl2), and DLPs were dialyzed against TNE (50 mM Tris pH8 7.4, 100 mM NaCl, 0.1 mM EDTA). Cores were prepared from DLPs according to the protocol described by Desselberger et al. (Desselberger et al., 2013). Briefly, 200 ul of DLPs in TNE (concentration of 250 ug/ml) were treated with 200 ul of 2.4 M CaCl2, incubated at room temperature for 2 minutes, and then pelleted by ultracentrifugation at 90,000 * g for 15 minutes at 4 degrees C. The cores were resuspended in 50 ul of 200 uM CaCl2. Virions, DLPs, and cores were stored at 4 degrees C in the presence of protease inhibitors (Roche). Protein/RNA concentration of the preparations was determined by UV spectrophotometry (OD280). Protein quality was assessed by SDS-PAGE in 10% acrylamide gels and Gel Code Blue stain (Pierce) or Silver Quest stain (Life Technologies). Subcellular fractions of mock-infected and SA11-infected MA104 cells were prepared using an approach similar to that described by Helmberger-Jones and Patton (Helmberger-Jones and Patton, 1986). Briefly, MA104 cells in five confluent 150-cm2tissue culture flasks were either mock-infected or infected with trypsin-activated SA11 at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 10 plaque-forming units (pfu) per cell. At 10 hours p.i., the cells were washed twice with cold RSB (3 mM Tris pH 8.1, 0.5 mM MgCl2, 3 mM NaCl). The cells were removed from the tissue culture flasks by scraping into 5 ml of cold RSB and then lysed on ice using 14 strokes of a Dounce homogenizer. The lysates were clarified by centrifugation at 4 degrees C for 10 minutes at 12,000 *g, and then 1-ml aliquots were layered onto 5-ml 15-30% (w/v) sucrose step gradients prepared in TMN (3 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.1, 66 mM NH4Cl, 3 mM magnesium acetate, 14 mM potassium acetate, 1 mM dithioerythritol). Gradients were subjected to ultracentrifugation at 4 degrees C for 90 minutes at 200,000 *gusing a swing-bucket rotor. The pelleted material was usually resuspended in 10 ul of HGD (10 mM HEPES, 10% glycerol, and 2 mM DTT), except for the affinity capture EM experiments (see below). In that case, the subcellular fraction from infected cells (i.e., the SVP preparation) was resuspended in Tris-glycine buffer (2.5 mM Tris pH 8.3, 19.2 mM glycine). Protein/RNA concentration of the preparations was determined by UV spectrophotometry (OD280). Protein quality was assessed by SDS-PAGE in 10% acrylamide gels and Gel Code Blue stain (Pierce) or Silver Quest stain (Life Technologies). Viral proteins VP1, VP2, VP6, NSP2, and NSP5 were also detected by immunoblot analyses (Fig. S1). Approximately 10 ul of the subcellular fractions derived from mock-infected or RV-infected cells (see above) was mixed with 10 ul of 2* loading buffer (5 mM Tris pH 8.3, 38.4 mM glycine, 20% glycerol, 0.02% bromophenol blue) and electrophoresed in a 10-cm 0.6% agarose Tris-glycine (2.5 mM Tris pH 8.3, 19.2 mM glycine) gel. The gel was fully submerged in Tris-glycine running buffer and electrophoresed at room temperature for 2 hours at 125 V or until the bromophenol blue dye front migrated ~8 cm from the wells. The location of protein complexes in the gel was determined following Gel Code Blue staining (Pierce); bands were excised from parallel, unstained gel lanes using a clean scalpel. The protein-RNA complexes were electro-eluted from the gel slices into Tris-glycine buffer using MAXI D-tubes (Novagen) according to manufacturer's instructions. Gel purified preparations were stored for less than 4 days at 4 degrees C in the presence of protease inhibitors (Roche). Protein/RNA concentration of the preparations was determined by UV spectrophotometry (OD280). Protein quality was assessed by SDS-PAGE in 10% acrylamide gels and Gel Code Blue stain (Pierce) or immunoblot (data not shown). Carboxy-terminally his-tagged rNSP2 was expressed and purified as described previously (Taraporewala et al., 1999). Briefly, rNSP2 was expressed inE. coliM15 cells using the pQE60g8 vector, and it was purified from bacterial lysates using Ni2+-nitrilotriacetic acid (NTA) affinity chromatography. Purified rNSP2 was dialyzed against LSB supplemented with 50 mM NaCl and stored at -20 degrees C. Protein concentration of the preparations was determined by UV spectrophotometry (OD280), and quality was assessed by SDS-PAGE in 10% acrylamide gels and Gel Code Blue stain (Pierce) (Fig. S2A). Recombinant RV gene 8 +RNA was generated using the T7 MEGAscript transcription system (Ambion) as described byMcDonald et al., 2011(McDonald and Patton, 2011). Quantity of +RNA was determined by using a UV spectrophotometer (OD260), and quality was assessed by electrophoresis in 7 M urea-5% polyacrylamide gels stained with ethidium bromide (Fig. S2B). The replicase activity of the SVP preparation or gel-purified core RI population was determined using anin vitrominus-strand RNA synthesis assay described by Patton (Patton, 1986). Each 25-ul reaction contained greater than 100 ng of protein, 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 6 mM MgAc, 4 mM DTT, 2 mM of each NTP, 1ul RNasin (Promega), and 1 uCi of [alpha-32P]-UTP (3,000 Ci/mmol, Perkin Elmer). Reactions proceeded for 3 hours at 30 degrees C, and [32P]-labeled dsRNAs were deproteinated using phenol-chloroform extraction and then resolved by SDS-PAGE in 12% polyacrylamide gels. The gels were dried onto filter paper and dsRNA bands were visualized using a GE Storm 860 phosphorimager. For transcription reactions, 50-ul mixtures contained 1 ug of virion-derived DLPs, 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 6 mM MgAc, 4 mM DTT, and 2 mM of each of NTP and 1 ul RNasin (Promega) and proceeded for 10 minutes at 37 degrees C prior to EM imaging. Control transcription reactions were prepared using all components with the exception of ATP (Fig. S2C). Aliquots of specimens (0.01 mg/ml-1.0 mg/ml) were added onto glow-discharged, carbon coated EM grids for 1 minute. The grids were blotted with filter paper to remove excess fluid, washed with ultrapure water, and then negatively-stained for 10 seconds using 1% uranyl acetate or 1% uranyl formate. Specimens were embedded in stain at a variety of thicknesses to assess particle collapse. For some experiments, samples were treated with 1 unit of RNase A (New England BioLab) for 5 minutes at room temperature prior to being added to EM grid. The immunoaffinity-capture EM experiments were performed using a method similar to that described previously (Gilmore et al., 2013). Briefly, EM grids were decorated with Ni2+-NTA lipid layers and then incubated for 1 minute at room temperature with 4-ul aliquots of his-tagged Protein A (0.01 mg/ml) (Abcam) in buffer containing 50 mM HEPES (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 10 mM MgCl2, and 10 mM CaCl2. Excess liquid was blotted away with filter paper, and the grids were incubated with 4-ul aliquots of either alpha-VP1 or alpha-VP3 guinea pig polyclonal antisera (provided by Dr. John T. Patton, National Institutes of Health) or with control/no antibody for 1 minute at room temperature. Thereafter, 4 ul of either the subviral particle preparation or virion-derived core (0.1 mg/ml) were added onto the grid for 1 minute at room temperature. The grids were washed several times with ultrapure water, and then they were negatively-stained as described above. Complexes on EM grids were observed using an FEI Spirit BioTwin TEM (FEI company) equipped with a LaB6filament operating at 120 kV under low-dose conditions (~ 3 electrons/A2). Images were recorded on a FEI Eagle 2k HS CCD camera at a magnification of 40,000*. To calculate 10 class averages of ~300 immunoaffinity-captured VP1-VP3 complexes from the EM images, the SPIDER software program was used (Frank et al., 1996;Shaikh et al., 2008). To quantitate the diameter of particles from ~200 EM images of the gel-purified core RI population, the MATLAB software program was used. Specifically, EM images were imported as TIFF files, thresholded at 70% peak intensity, converted to binary, and de-speckled with a 9 * 9 kernal median filter. Contiguous points in the particle image were determined using MWLABEL, and particle area was determined using REGION PROPS. The radius and diameter of each particle was then calculated from the area, assuming each particle is a circle (A=pir2).