Hydrogen sulphide (H2S) is increasingly recognized as an important mediator of mammalian physiology and pathology, playing roles in vasorelaxation,Noneangiogenesis,Noneredox regulation,Noneneuromodulation,Nonelifespan,NoneHuntington's disease,NoneDown syndrome,Nonediabetes,Noneand cancer. NoneIn mammals, endogenous H2S is generated from cystathionine beta-synthase (CBS),Nonecystathionine gamma-lyase (CSE),Noneand 3-mercaptopyruvate sulphur transferase (3MST). NoneSimilar to its reactive cousins, nitric oxide (NO) and hydrogen peroxide (H2O2),NoneH2S mediates cellular functionviadirect chemical interaction with biological molecules and can have widely disparate effects that depend on concentration, tissue localization, and the molecular environment. None-NoneFor example, H2S in colon cancer promotes tumour growth by stimulating angiogenesis and supporting cellular energetics,Nonewhilst H2S in prostate cancer slows cell growth, disrupts androgen receptor transactivation, and reduces angiogenesis by inhibiting the function of hypoxia-inducible factor 1. NoneGiven the delicate site- and concentration-dependent actions of H2S, easy methods for accurate spatiotemporal detection in living cells and animals are in urgent demand and promise to significantly contribute to an increased understanding of this reactive signalling molecule. Common methods of H2S detection, including the methylene blue assay, ion-selective electrodes, amperometric sensors, and gas chromatography, have varying strengths and weaknesses, but all generally fall short of being able to detect H2S inside of intact living organisms. NoneFluorescent probes offer the ability to target specific analytesNone,Noneand there has been an explosion of recent activity in the development of dyes responsive to H2S and its derivatives. None-NoneUnfortunately, imaging endogenous H2S remains rare, and often requires advanced confocal microscopy setups to allow precise same-cell tracking or two-photon excitation coupled with ratiometric imaging. None,NoneThis instrumentation is unavailable to many researchers, reducing the potential impact of these newly developed tools. NoneFurthermore, there are few examples ofin vivoimaging of H2S,Noneand imaging deep mammalian tissue remains a frontier field for H2S detection. At the heart of the matter is a lack of sensitivity and depth penetration due to background autofluorescence, light scattering, photoactivation/photobleaching, and probe kinetics that requires long incubation times to accumulate signal. In order to address these technological challenges and develop tools to better elucidate the precise mechanisms of H2S production and function, we have herein developed a series of selective and sensitive chemiluminescent probes for rapid imaging of H2S in living animals. Triggered chemiluminescence emission can provide a highly sensitive readout of biological analytes. NoneChemiluminescence doesn't require light excitation, thereby drastically reducing background from autofluorescence and photoactivation of azide functional groups. Whereas bioluminescence (chemiluminescence derived from living systems that express bioluminescent enzymes such as luciferase) has found wide application for preclinical analysis of biological parameters using genetically modified organisms,Nonesmall molecule chemiluminescence can be used with wild-type animals and opens up exciting opportunities for clinical imaging. Recently, there have appeared select examples of chemiluminescent agents for the detection of H2Sin vitro. None,NoneAlthough quite promising, the need for enzymatic additives and alkaline conditions introduces cytotoxicity and can potentially release sulphide from proteins and other base-labile sulphur pools,None,Noneultimately hindering their potential for whole animal imaging. To overcome these issues and expand the scope of chemiluminescent detection technology for small molecule biological analytes, we focused on using sterically stabilized 1,2-dioxetane systemsNoneto develop a series of new chemiluminescent H2S probes that display instantaneous light production under biologically compatible conditions. Sterically stabilized dioxetanes have been used for femtogram detection of enzymatic analytesNoneand have demonstrated potential forin vivoimaging. NoneWe introduce three first generation chemiluminescent H2S probes,CHS-1,CHS-2, andCHS-3, derived from sterically stabilized spiroadamantane 1,2-dioxetane scaffolds modified with self-immolative 4-azidobenzyl carbonates as the H2S response site (Scheme 1). NoneThis article reports their synthetic preparation, optical response and selectivity for H2S, experimental and computational mechanistic investigations of their chemiluminescent response, detection of cellular H2S using a multi-well plate reader, and a noteworthy demonstration of whole animal chemiluminescent imaging of H2S.TheCHSprobe series was designed such that chemiluminescent emission would be initiated by the H2S-mediated reduction of the azide group, followed by self-immolative carbonate cleavage yielding the free phenolate bearing the 1,2-dioxetane (Scheme 1). The negatively charged phenolate will emit light spontaneously upon decompositionviaan intramolecular chemically initiated electron exchange luminescence (CIEEL) mechanism. None-NoneThis newly produced light can be observed directly or by transfer of its energy to acceptor molecules like quantum dots, rhodamine, or fluorescein. NoneIn our studies, we employ a commercially available Emerald II Enhancer solution that consists of a cationic polymer and a dye with similar photophysical properties to fluorescein. The polymer reduces water-induced quenching by providing a hydrophobic environment for the chemiluminescent reaction and the dye effectively red shifts the luminescence emission making it more amenable for biological imaging applications. By adapting a literature procedure,Nonewe optimized an efficient and modular synthetic route to access the probesCHS-1,CHS-2, andCHS-3(Scheme 2). First, unsubstituted, fluorinated, and chlorinated 3-methoxybenzaldehyde derivatives1a-cwere reacted with trimethyl orthoformate in the presence ofp-toluenesulfonic acid to give acetals2a-c. These acetals were subjected to triethyl phosphite and boron trifluoride diethyl etherate at 0 degrees C, which afforded the diethyl methoxy (3-methoxyphenyl) methyl phosphonates3a-c. Next, enol ethers4a-cwere obtained through Horner-Wadsworth-Emmons reaction by treating phosphonates3a-cwithNoneBuLi and 2-adamantanone. NoneNucleophilic demethylation using sodium ethanethiolate provided the phenols5a-c. The activated ester6, prepared according to analogous literature procedures, was coupled to the phenols to provide7a-c, azide-bearing precursors to the final 1,2-dioxetanes. None,NoneFinally, a [2 + 2] cycloaddition with singlet oxygen was accomplished by bubbling oxygen through a solution of7a-cand the sensitizer Rose bengal with visible light irradiation, delivering the chemiluminescent probesCHS-1,CHS-2, andCHS-3. With the first threeCHSprobes in hand, we proceeded to measure their luminescent responses to H2S using an F-7000 Hitachi spectrophotometer. At pH 7.4, treatment of theCHSprobes with H2S resulted in instantaneous luminescent emission that increased over a course of 10 minutes in a dose-dependent manner (Fig. 1). Addition of the fluorescein-based Emerald II Enhancer provided a red-shifted peak centred at 545 nm compared to the 470 nm emission of the phenolate (Fig. 1, insets). Under these physiologically relevant conditions, we observed an increase in the integrated luminescent response to H2S fromCHS-1toCHS-2toCHS-3, giving 5-fold, 4-fold, and 12-fold turn-on responses respectively. It should be noted that no background corrections were performed and the values inFig. 1are direct instrumental values to provide an accurate comparison between probes. At pH 10,CHS-1provided the highest chemiluminescence intensity and response, giving a 7-fold increase in photon emission in the first 10 minutes after adding 200 muM H2S (Fig. S1None). Under these alkaline conditions, the H2S-triggered chemiluminescent emissions of the fluorinatedCHS-2and chlorinatedCHS-3were lower thanCHS-1. The background signal also increases withCHS-2andCHS-3, reducing the relative increases over control to 2-fold and 3-fold respectively. A key advantage of these probes is that they display an immediate concentration-dependent emission of light that persists for over an hour (Fig. S2None), an ideal property for the high-throughput detection and imaging of H2S generated in biological environments. We next tested the selectivity ofCHS-1,CHS-2, andCHS-3for H2S against other biologically relevant reactive sulphur, oxygen, and nitrogen (RSON) species. The response ofCHS-1to 200 muM Na2S in 20 mM HEPES buffered to pH 7.4 was tested against other RSON species by adding 5 mM reduced glutathione (GSH), 1 mMl-cysteine and homocysteine, and 200 muM ofS-nitrosoglutathione, sulfite (SO32-), hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), hypochlorite (OCl-),tert-butyl hydroperoxide (NoneBuOOH), nitroxyl (HNO), nitric oxide (NO), and nitrite (NO2-). None of the species tested displayed significant increases in luminescence intensity over the blank control (Fig. 2a). Additionally, the response to Na2S was minimally perturbed by the presence of physiological levels of GSH,l-cysteine, and homocysteine. We observed similar results whenCHS-2andCHS-3were evaluated for their selectivity in 20 mM HEPES at pH 7.4 (Fig. 2b and c). These response and selectivity data demonstrate thatCHS-1,CHS-2, andCHS-3are able to detect H2S at physiologically relevant pH with minimal interference from competing analytes. We next sought to understand the factors that lead to increased light production and optimized response for 1,2-dioxetane chemiluminescent probes. First, we investigated the role of the phenol/phenolate equilibrium. Since the measurement of the pKaof the phenolate dioxetane products of theCHSprobes is complicated by their rapid chemiluminescent decomposition, we used the reported experimental values of phenol, 2-fluorophenol, and 2-chlorophenol as an approximation. NoneWe plotted the integrated chemiluminescent emission ofCHS-1,CHS-2, andCHS-3in response to 200 muM Na2S at pH 7.4 and pH 10 (Fig. 3a and b) against the experimental pKavalues for phenol, 2-fluorophenol, and 2-chlorophenol (Fig. 3c and d). The H2S-stimulated emission intensity at pH 7.4 displays an increasing trend with increased phenol acidity, indicating that ionization of the phenol is critical to attaining good luminescent response under these conditions (Fig. 3c). On the other hand, there is no clear correlation with phenol pKaand the chemiluminescent response at pH 10 (Fig. 3d). We further investigated the nature of the chemiluminescent emission by performing quantum chemistry calculations on the phenolate structures released fromCHS-1,CHS-2, andCHS-3after reaction with Na2S (Tables S1-S3None). Geometries were optimized using density functional theory (DFT) at the B3LYP/6-311+G(d,p) level of theory, and the charge on each atom was calculated using an electrostatic potential (ESP) model at the M06/6-311+G(d,p) level of theory. All calculations were carried out with the integral equation formalism polarizable continuum model (IEF-PCM) in water as solvent using the Gaussian 09 program package. While we found no correlation between the charge on the phenolic oxygen (O8) and the chemiluminescent response at pH 7.4 (Fig. 3e), an excellent correlation (R2 greater than 0.99) was observed with the response at pH 10 (Fig. 3f). ESP charge calculations performed with B3LYP and omegaB97XD functionals also provided good correlations (R2 greater than 0.97) of the O8 charge and the chemiluminescent response at pH 10 (Fig. S3None). These data indicate that at lower pH, the chemiluminescent emission is governed by the equilibrium between the protonated phenol and unprotonated phenolate oxygen, and are in agreement with previous observations. NoneCHS-3is the most readily ionized and therefore shows the highest chemiluminescent emission. On the other hand, at pH 10 the phenolate species dominates for all three deprotected dioxetanes and the efficiency of chemiluminescent emission is predicted by the more negative O8 charge density, probably due to an increased propensity towards initiation of the first intramolecular electron transfer step of CIEEL. None,NoneThese data reveal trends that, when taken together, provide a powerful predictive model for the design of improved chemiluminescent reagents. Our results show thatCHS-3provides the most robust light emission at physiological pH when compared toCHS-1andCHS-2. We therefore examined the ability ofCHS-3to detect cellular H2S production in human lung adenocarcinoma epithelial cells (A549). These cells express the enzyme cystathionine gamma-lyase (CSE),Nonewhich can utilize homocysteine (Hcy) as a substrate for H2S production. We first demonstrated the ability ofCHS-3to detect exogenous Na2S in a multi-well plate reader format (Fig. 4a), and determined an estimated detection limit (blank control + 3 S.D.) of 5.4 muM. We then incubated A549 cells with Hcy, a substrate for the enzyme CSE. This resulted in ?10% increase (n= 12,p= 0.044) in luminescent emission fromCHS-3compared with vehicle treated cells (Fig. 4b). Pre-incubation with the CSE inhibitord,l-propargylglycine (PAG) before adding Hcy attenuates signal observed fromCHS-3. Although the observed increase is small, it is statistically significant and the efficacy ofCHS-3for endpoint detection of H2S generated by whole cells at physiological pH is an important advance that sets the stage for imaging H2S in living animals. We next investigated the ability ofCHS-3to image H2S at physiological pH using an IVIS Spectrum. An opaque 96-well plate was loaded with 0, 25, 50, 100, and 200 muM Na2S in 20 mM HEPES buffer (pH 7.4) containing 20% Emerald II Enhancer. CHS-3was added at 40 muM and imaged to reveal a clear increase in luminescence intensity with increasing H2S concentrations (Fig. 5a). Averages of repeated experiments provide a good linear response in the range of 0-200 muM when imaged 30 s after exposure to H2S (Fig. 5b). We next applied a mouse carcass model to determine ifCHS-3would have sufficient light output to be observable through mammalian tissue. The carcasses of sacrificed SCID/BALB-C mice were injected withCHS-3and either a vehicle control (Fig. S4a and bNone) or 0.4 mumol H2S (Fig. S4c and dNone) into the peritoneal cavity. An increase in luminescence could be clearly observed in the peritoneum of the carcass injected with H2Sversusthe carcass injected with the vehicle control. Confident that light emission fromCHS-3was capable of significant tissue penetration, we finally sought to establish the ability ofCHS-3to image H2S in living animals. C6 brown mice were administered i.p. injections on one side of their peritoneal cavity. The skin was raised during injections to avoid puncturing internal organs. Images were acquired 30 s after injecting 0.08 mumolCHS-3and either 0.4 mumol Na2S or a vehicle control (H2O) in 100 muL HEPES buffered at pH 7.4 containing 20% Emerald II Enhancer. The final concentration of Na2S in the injection was 4 mM. While vehicle control experiments produced modest signal (Fig. 5c), the mice that received Na2S treatments displayed robust emission of light that was easily detected through their tissue (Fig. 5d). Quantification of the total photon flux from replicate experiments (Fig. S5None) revealed ?4-fold increase (n= 3,p= 0.025) in the luminescence response in the Na2S treated miceversusvehicle controls (Fig. 5e). The agents were well tolerated and the mice showed no immediate outward signs of malaise. Taken together, these data provide a key milestone towards the development of a new class ofin vivoimaging tools for investigating biological hydrogen sulphide. We have designed and synthesized three 1,2-dioxetane chemiluminescent reaction-based H2S probes,CHS-1,CHS-2, andCHS-3that display immediate light emission upon reacting with H2S at physiological pH, a significant advance for H2S detection technology. These reagents provide a sensitive and selective detection platform for H2S using spectrophotometers, multi-well plate readers, and IVIS Spectrum instruments. We have provided a computational and experimentally supported mechanistic framework that serves as a predictive model for designing sterically hindered 1,2-dioxetanes with improved light emission based on the pKaof the phenol released after reacting with H2S and the relative atomic charge densities of these structures. Finally, we demonstrated thatCHS-3was not only capable of detecting cellular H2S produced by A549 cells treated with homocysteine at neutral pH, but also has the rare ability to image H2S in living animals. WhileCHS-3provides an exciting proof of principle forin vivochemiluminescence imaging, we are currently engaged in improving the sensitivity and biocompatibility of chemiluminescent 1,2-dioxetane reagents for diverse applications, and anticipate that these new optimized systems will provide powerful whole animal imaging tools across a range of biological analytes and parameters.