In rodents, glucagon-producing alpha-cells are the second most abundant endocrine cell type in pancreatic islets of Langerhans, after the insulin-producing beta-cells. In human islets, alpha-cells are nearly as abundant as beta-cells (1,2). They secrete glucagon in response to reduced blood glucose to promote gluconeogenesis and glycogenolysis in the liver (3). Proper control of blood glucose level thus relies on insulin action and the counter-regulation mediated by glucagon signaling. Besides this, insulin and glucagon reciprocally regulate alpha- and beta-cell function through local, intraislet paracrine signaling (4). Excess of plasma glucagon (hyperglucagonemia) is frequently reported in diabetic patients, a deregulation that exacerbates hyperglycemia and triggers ketoacidosis, a major complication of diabetes (5). A recent study showed that streptozotocin (STZ)-induced diabetes is prevented in glucagon receptor-knockout (GcgR-/-) mice, suggesting that in diabetes, hyperglycemia is largely due to glucagon action (6). Therefore, reducing the alpha-cell mass to limit glucagon production may represent an interesting approach to prevent glucagon excess in diabetes. Nevertheless, it is unknown how a severe decrease in pancreatic alpha-cell mass would be tolerated in physiologic or in diabetic conditions. Indeed, whereas a strong deficit in beta-cell mass triggers diabetes, less is known regarding the requirement of maintaining intact the adult alpha-cell population. Complete disruption of glucagon signaling in GcgR-/-mice is associated with defects in endocrine cell differentiation and increased embryonic lethality (7-9). In addition, mice that are unable to process proglucagon in its mature and active form due to prohormone convertase 2 (PC2) inactivation also display altered islet cell differentiation (10,11). GcgR-/-and PC2-/-adult mutant mice both exhibit an expanded alpha-cell mass, which is associated with lower blood glucose levels. Mice constitutively lacking aristaless-related homeobox (ARX) in the pancreas from early development display an alpha-cell deficit associated with abnormally increased non-alpha-cell numbers and hypoglycemia (12). In this situation, the altered metabolic status of adult individuals may reflect adaptation phenomena subsequent to developmental defects. Collectively, these studies that focused on the effect of glucagon deficiency did not directly address whether functional alpha-cells are essential per se for proper beta-cell function and blood glucose homeostasis in physiologic conditions in adulthood. In the current study, we have analyzed a model of inducible, selective alpha-cell loss that we previously used in studies involving beta-cell regeneration (13). Here, we examine the short- and long-term influence on blood glucose homeostasis of an acute, rapid, near-total alpha-cell ablation induced in healthy normal adult mice. We show that a very limited number of adult alpha-cells, some 2% of the normal alpha-cell mass, is sufficient to preserve a normal counter-response to insulin in basal conditions, without affecting beta-cell function or longevity. Furthermore, we report that extreme alpha-cell removal, contrary to what happens in GcgR-/-mice (6), does not prevent hyperglycemia after beta-cell loss, indicating that the few remaining alpha-cells still mediate normal glucagon signaling in diabetes. We previously generated theGlucagon-DTRmouse line in which the administration of diphtheria toxin (DT) induces selective and massive ablation of adult alpha-cells (13). This is achieved through the transgenic expression of human DT receptor (DTR) on the alpha-cell surface, driven by a 1.6-kb proximal fragment of the rat glucagon promoter (Fig. 1None). alpha-Cell ablation inGlucagon-DTRmice. A: DT injection triggers alpha-cell ablation inGlucagon-DTRtransgenic mice but not in wild-type mice. Two days after DT injection, dying cells are detected by TUNEL, mainly at islet periphery inGlucagon-DTRanimals (middle). At 1 week after DT injection, islets in transgenic mice are devoid of glucagon-expressing cells (right). The dashed lines delineate islets. Scale bars = 20 mum. B: At 1 week after DT treatment, 97.9% of glucagon-expressing cells were destroyed (*P= 0.05, one-tailed Mann-WhitneyUtest; values inTable 1). C: At 1 week after DT, pancreatic glucagon content was reduced to 0.86% of control (***P= 0.0001, one-tailed Mann-WhitneyUtest; values inTable 1). (A high-quality digital representation of this figure is available in the online issue.) DT-untreated adultGlucagon-DTRmice were healthy and showed normal blood glucose homeostasis, like nontransgenic controls. For this reason, they were well suited for studying the effect of extreme alpha-cell mass deficit in metabolically unbiased adult animals. Histologically,Glucagon-DTRmice exhibited normal islet architecture, with peripheral alpha-cells and no detectable islet cell death (Fig. 1None). By contrast, numerous apoptotic islet cells were seen inGlucagon-DTRmice 2 days after one DT injection (500 ng). One week after 3 DT injections (1,500 ng; seeRESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS), the vast majority of islets were totally devoid of alpha-cells (Fig. 1None,bottom). We measured alpha-cell ablation efficiency by morphometry and pancreatic hormone dosage and found the number of alpha-cells and pancreatic glucagon content were decreased by 97.9% and 99.14%, respectively (Fig. 1NoneandNoneandTable 1). In agreement with results obtained using theGlucagon-CreandGlucagon-rtTAmouse lines, which bear the same rat glucagon promoter fragment (14), we detected transgene expression solely in pancreatic alpha-cells. Therefore, beta-, delta-, PP-, as well as intestinal L cells, were normally present after DT treatment inGlucagon-DTRmice (Supplementary Figs. 1 and 2None). The L cells were not eliminated with DT treatment because "intestinal-specific"cis-regulatory elements of the glucagon promoter (located ?2.0-kb upstream of the start site) are absent in the transgene (15). Altogether, these results showed that alpha-cell ablation is specific and efficient. Glucagon and alpha-cell content in the pancreas ofGlucagon-DTRmice*P less than = 0.005. P less than = 0.01. P less than = 0.05. In all experiments described below, only 2-month-old male mice were used. When indicated, these animals received 1.5 mug of DT (i.e., 3 i.p. injections). A follow-up of DT-treatedGlucagon-DTRmice was done to assess the lasting impact of near-complete alpha-cell ablation in adult animals. All DT-treated transgenic mice were viable and healthy during the entire period of analysis (up to 6 months after DT; i.e., 8-month-old mice), which allowed us to evaluate their metabolic status. Fasting and random-fed body weights were not affected after alpha-cell ablation (Fig. 2NoneandSupplementary Fig 3None). Surprisingly, DT-treated animals did not exhibit reduced glycemia compared with controls during fasting or in random-fed conditions (Fig. 2NoneandSupplementary Fig. 3None). In addition, glycemia was not significantly changed, even after a prolonged starvation (27-h fasting;Supplementary Fig. 3None). Furthermore, DT-treatedGlucagon-DTRmice displayed normal insulin sensitivity and were able to recover a normal glycemic level after an insulin-induced hypoglycemia (Fig. 2None). Extreme alpha-cell loss moderately decreases circulating glucagon and has no effect on the counter-regulatory response. Evolution of body weight (A) and glycemia (B) in fasted controls (n= 3; DT-untreated, black ?) and DT-treated (n= 3; red ?) Glucagon-DTRmice. C: Glycemia after insulin-induced hypoglycemia 1 week after alpha-cell ablation. Blood glucose increased in both DT-treated mice (red ?) and controls (black ?) after an insulin challenge (n= 3/group). D: Plasma glucagon 1 week and 6 months after DT (red ?) injections and in control (black ?) mice. Glucagonemia was significantly reduced by 35% 1 week after DT (***P= 0.001) but returned to normal levels 6 months later (values inSupplementary Table 2). Confocal images of pancreatic sections stained for insulin (green) and glucagon (red) in controls (E) andGlucagon-DTRmice (F). Very few pancreatic alpha-cells can be observed 1 week after DT. E'andF': higher magnification of the dotted areas depicted inEandF, respectively. Scale bars = 100 mum inEandFand 20 mum inE'andF'. G: Arginine-induced glucagon secretion from perfused pancreas 1 week after DT or in controls. H: Quantification of arginine-induced glucagon secretion upon arginine stimulation (1,290.2 +/- 281.9 for controls, and 423.3 +/- 85.3 pg/mL for DT-treatedGlucagon-DTRmice; *P= 0.014). (A high-quality digital representation of this figure is available in the online issue.) Because the counter-regulatory response was not impaired in alpha-cell-depleted mice, we verified their circulating glucagon levels. One week after DT, transgenic animals were hypoglucagonemic (38.7 +/- 1.2,n= 10), with a 35% reduction in fasting plasma glucagon compared with controls (59.3 +/- 4.5 pg/mL,n= 14;P= 0.001;Fig. 2None). The observed plasma glucagon levels were surprisingly high considering the 98% alpha-cell loss; we thus explored whether extrapancreatic glucagon was produced in this condition. We found that glucagon was not ectopically secreted from the intestine, because1) no glucagon-expressing cells were found in the duodenum, jejunum, or ileum (2,261 villi from 4 mice were scored), and2) no glucagon protein was detected in intestinal extracts 1 week after alpha-cell removal (Supplementary Fig. 2NoneandNone). Instead, it is likely that the very few pancreatic alpha-cells that escaped DT accounted for the relatively high glucagonemia found inGlucagon-DTRmice after extreme alpha-cell ablation (Fig. 2NoneandNone;Supplementary Table 2). We therefore measured glucagon secretion from perfused pancreata after ablation. Interestingly, basal pancreatic glucagon secretion in DT-treatedGlucagon-DTRmice was similar to that of controls, thus confirming the pancreatic origin of circulating glucagon after alpha-cell loss (Fig. 2None). The increase in glucagon secretion upon secretagogue (arginine) induction was very moderate in ablated mice, most likely reflecting the low amount of remnant alpha-cells (Fig. 2NoneandNone). We subsequently assessed how the moderate hypoglucagonemia affects hepatic function. The mRNA levels of hepatic gluconeogenic enzymes glucose-6-phosphatase (G6Pase) and PEPCK were not significantly changed 1 week after alpha-cell loss inGlucagon-DTRmice (Supplementary Fig. 3None). In agreement with this, gluconeogenesis was unaffected in these animals, as assessed by a pyruvate tolerance test (PTT;Supplementary Fig. 3NoneandNone). Interestingly, glucose mobilization after intraperitoneal glucagon injection (glucagon tolerance test) was increased after alpha-cell ablation (Supplementary Fig. 3NoneandNone). This increased glucagon sensitivity correlated with an observed tendency toward a slight increase in the transcription of hepatic GcgR and glycogen phosphorylase (GP) the key enzyme involved in glycogenolysis (Supplementary Fig. 3None). Taken together, these observations show that the control of blood glucose is normal 1 week after alpha-cell ablation and suggest that 2% of the alpha-cell mass is enough to maintain a plasma glucagon level sufficient to ensure normoglycemia under basal conditions. Furthermore, the decrease in circulating glucagon is rapidly compensated by enhanced glucagon sensitivity and glucose mobilization from the liver. alpha-Cells interact with beta-cells, most likely by local intraislet interactions, and alpha- and beta-cells express insulin and glucagon receptors, respectively (3,4,16-18). We thus assessed whether alpha-cells are important for adequate beta-cell function. Pancreatic insulin content was unchanged after DT, indicating that near-total alpha-cell ablation has no effect on global insulin production (Fig. 3None). Glucagon-DTRmice were also able to recover normoglycemia after glucose challenge (glucose tolerance test), either 1 week or 6 months after DT (Fig. 3NoneandSupplementary Fig. 4) and did not exhibit any defects in basal or glucose-stimulated insulin secretion, as shown by pancreas perfusion experiments (Fig. 3None). These results, together with the long-term follow-up of glycemia in alpha-cell-depletedGlucagon-DTRmice, reveal that massive loss of alpha-cells does not affect blood glucose homeostasis or beta-cell function. beta-Cell function is unaltered after alpha-cell ablation. A: Pancreatic insulin content measured 1 week after DT. Consistent with the specificity of alpha-cell ablation, pancreatic insulin content was unaffected after DT (control: 131.1 +/- 5.8,n= 6; DT: 134.0 +/- 11.0 ng/mg of pancreas,n= 7). B: Glucose tolerance test. DT-treatedGlucagon-DTRmice (red ?) were not intolerant to glucose 1 week after massive alpha-cell ablation (n= 6 for each group; control, black ?). C: Insulin secretion measured from perfused pancreas after glucose stimulation. No significant change in insulin secretion was observed 1 week after alpha-cell ablation (n= 4 for each group). One week after DT administration, the total pancreatic glucagon content had dropped to 0.86% of control level, but 1 and 6 months later, it was increased by a factor of 6.7- and 14-fold, respectively (Fig. 4NoneandTable 1). Basal glucagonemia was normal inGlucagon-DTRmice (n= 4) 6 months after alpha-cell destruction (63.0 +/- 0.9 vs. 64.2 +/- 0.4 pg/mL in controls,n= 3;Fig. 2None). These observations are consistent with1) increased glucagon production and secretion with time, by the few remaining alpha-cells, and2) the regeneration of new alpha-cells, or both. To explore these possibilities, we assessed the number of alpha-cells present in the pancreas 1 week, 1 month, and 6 months after DT (Supplementary Table 1). The total number of alpha-cells remained unchanged between 1 week and 1 month after DT, but was doubled at 6 months, from 0.17 at 1 month to 0.35 cells/mm25 months later (P= 0.0286;Fig. 4NoneandTable 1). The number of islets was similar between untreated and DT-treated animals at all intervals, suggesting that new islets are not formed after alpha-cell ablation (Fig. 4NoneandTable 1). The number of islet sections containing at least 1 alpha-cell did not increase during the regeneration period under study: the percentage of sections containing alpha-cells dropped 1 week after DT by about 10-fold compared with untreated controls and remained stable thereafter (Fig. 4NoneandTable 1). Nevertheless, among the islets that contained alpha-cells, the number of alpha-cells per islet section was almost doubled 6 months after DT, from 1.58 at 1 month to 2.48 alpha-cells/alpha-cell-containing islets (P= 0.0286;Fig. 4NoneandTable 1). These findings suggest that the doubling in alpha-cells observed 6 months post-DT was not due to the appearance of new glucagon-expressing cells in islets devoid of alpha-cells. Furthermore, we found that alpha-cell apoptosis and proliferation were not increased at any time after DT administration, thus suggesting that the low alpha-cell regeneration observed after massive alpha-cell ablation was not the consequence of a high rate alpha-cell turnover (Supplementary Figs. 5 and 6). Changes in pancreatic glucagon content and alpha-cell number after near-total alpha-cell loss. A: Pancreatic glucagon content was increased almost sevenfold between 1 week and 1 month (from 23.52 to 157.9 pg/mg; **P= 0.0048, one-tailed Mann-WhitneyUtest) and doubled between 1 and 6 months (157.9 to 331.4 pg/mg; *P= 0.0317, one-tailed Mann-WhitneyUtest) in DT-treated animals. B: Pancreatic alpha-cell number was not increased between 1 week and 1 month after DT but was doubled at 6 months. C: The total number of islets (defined as clusters of at least three beta-cells) remained unchanged after alpha-cell ablation. D: The number of islet sections containing at least one alpha-cell was dramatically reduced after DT treatment, throughout the whole period of analysis. E: The number of alpha-cells in islet sections containing alpha-cells after DT treatment was almost doubled at 6 months. F: The number of alpha-cells located outside of islets was always lower in DT-treated mice than in controls and did not increase significantly with time after DT. A-F: Black ? : control; red ? : DT-treated mice. The number of glucagon-positive cells located outside of islets was decreased after DT treatment by about eightfold 1 week after DT, from 0.0604 to 0.007 alpha-cells/mm2(P= 0.05), indicating that DT also kills extrainsular glucagon-expressing cells (Fig. 4NoneandTable 1). Interestingly, the extrainsular alpha-cell number always remained lower than that of controls at each interval. Altogether, these results suggest that1) although the alpha-cell number remains unchanged during the first month after ablation, the very few spared alpha-cells increase their glucagon content;2) the doubling in the alpha-cell number seen 6 months after DT is mainly due to the increase of glucagon-expressing cells in islets that retained at least one alpha-cell after DT, and3) there is no evidence of alpha-cell neogenesis from unidentified pancreatic precursors in extraislet structures or in islets totally devoid of alpha-cells after DT. We noted here that an in vivo cell lineage clonal analysis showed precisely one alpha-cell doubling during the first 6 months of postnatal life in normal mice (19). We recently showed that adult alpha-cells spontaneously reprogram to acquire beta-cell characteristics after extreme, near-total beta-cell destruction (13). We have now investigated whether the reverse beta-cell to alpha-cell transdifferentiation also occurs spontaneously after alpha-cell ablation; that is, if glucagon-expressing cells found several months after DT administration were indeed beta-cells that had been reprogrammed to glucagon production after alpha-cell loss. For this purpose, we performed a conditional cell lineage tracing usingRIP-CreERT,Rosa26YFP,Glucagon-DTRtransgenic mice (Fig. 5None). We irreversibly labeled beta-cells with the yellow fluorescent protein (YFP) by the administration of tamoxifen before alpha-cell ablation (Fig. 5None). DT was given to ablate alpha-cells 2 weeks later. At 1 and 6 months after DT, none of the few glucagon-expressing cells found were YFP-positive (634 islets from 6 mice were scored and 256 glucagon-positive cells analyzed), whereas almost all beta-cells were fluorescently tagged (Fig. 5None-None). In conclusion, the glucagon-expressing cells present after massive alpha-cell ablation are not reprogrammed beta-cells. Newly formed alpha-cells after ablation are not reprogrammed beta-cells. A: Transgenes required for the inducible beta-cell tracing and alpha-cell ablation. B: Experimental design for irreversible labeling of adult beta-cells before alpha-cell ablation. C-F: Almost all beta-cells were YFP-labeled after tamoxifen (TAM) administration in control animals (DT-untreated). G-J: At 6 months after DT, none of the very rare glucagon-expressing cells were YFP-positive (the arrowhead points to one alpha-cell, also shown in thetop right insetat higher magnification). Scale bars = 20 mum. (A high-quality digital representation of this figure is available in the online issue.) Taken together, these observations suggest that the few newly formed alpha-cells inGlucagon-DTRmice mainly arise within islets retaining at least one alpha-cell after DT, likely through alpha-cell replication (one event, on average, between 1 and 6 months). Several elements support this view:1) the number of alpha-cell-containing islets did not increase with time after ablation,2) the number of glucagon-positive cells increased by a factor of two only in alpha-cell-containing islets, and3) the beta-cell lineage-tracing revealed that beta-cells do not transdifferentiate spontaneously into alpha-cells. Inhibition of glucagon signaling (GcgR-/-mice) was recently shown to prevent STZ-induced diabetes (6). We thus assessed whether near-total alpha-cell ablation inGlucagon-DTRmice affects or prevents hyperglycemia. For this purpose,Glucagon-DTRmice were treated 1 week after DT with a high dose of STZ (200 mug/g) to induce ?90% beta-cell removal (Fig. 6None-None). Interestingly, mice that had only residual alpha-cells (arrowheads inFig. 6NoneandNone) became overtly hyperglycemic and lost weight after beta-cell destruction, like diabetic mice with normal alpha-cell mass (Fig. 6NoneandNone). Similarly, the simultaneous coablation of beta- and alpha-cells (inGlucagon-DTR, RIP-DTRdouble transgenic mice) (13) also induced hyperglycemia and cachexia (Supplementary Fig. 7). These results show that near-total alpha-cell ablation does not prevent diabetes, contrary to what happens in GcgR-/-mice (6). This was consistent with the unaltered glucagon secretion and counter-regulatory response after removal of 98% of alpha-cells under physiologic conditions. alpha-Cell ablation does not prevent streptozotocin (STZ)-induced diabetes. A: Experimental design. One high dose of STZ (200 mug/g of mouse weight) was administered toGlucagon-DTRmice to ablate beta-cells 1 week after massive DT-mediated alpha-cell removal. Animals were killed 2 weeks after STZ. B-G: Confocal images of pancreatic sections show DT-mediated alpha-cell ablation and STZ-mediated beta-cell removal. White arrowheads show remaining alpha-cells after DT. Scale bars = 20 mum. H: Follow up of glycemia. All STZ-treated mice become hyperglycemic irrespective of DT administration. By contrast, animals that did not receive STZ remain normoglycemic (red ? :Glucagon-DTRmice treated with both DT and STZ,n= 6; black ? :Glucagon-DTRmice treated only with STZ,n= 6; black ? : untreatedGlucagon-DTRmice,n= 3; red ? :Glucagon-DTRmice treated only with DT). I: Body weight 15 days after STZ. All mice treated with STZ lose weight and develop typical diabetes symptoms. (A high-quality digital representation of this figure is available in the online issue.) We have shown that near-total alpha-cell loss in adult mice has little effect on glucagonemia and no apparent effect on beta-cell function or glucose homeostasis. This reveals that 2 to 4% of the normal alpha-cell mass is astonishingly sufficient to produce enough glucagon to ensure glycemic control under basal conditions. Massive alpha-cell loss is associated with a rapid enhancement of glucagon sensitivity, which allows increased glucose mobilization, even if the decrease in glucagonemia is very mild. A corollary of this observation is that the normal amount of pancreatic alpha-cells apparently exceeds the physiologic requirement for proper blood glucose homeostasis. Indeed, the total glucagon found in the pancreas when only 2% of the alpha-cells remain was sufficient to maintain normoglucagonemia. A simple calculation reveals that if all pancreatic glucagon found 1 week after alpha-cell loss (?7,400 pg;Supplementary Table 2) were entirely released at once into the circulation, glucagonemia would be more than 120-fold higher than the normal value of about 60 pg (Supplementary Table 2). The amount of glucagon measured in plasma after 98% alpha-cell ablation (?40 pg;Supplementary Table 2) only represents 0.5% of the residual pancreatic glucagon content produced by the remaining 2% of alpha-cells (7,400 pg). This suggests that the intracellular glucagon store in the remaining alpha-cells is, in principle, sufficient to maintain basal glucagonemia. However, because plasma glucagon has a half-life of only 2 min (20-22), sustained glucagon biosynthesis after alpha-cell ablation is mandatory to maintain glucagonemia and pancreatic content over time. Indeed, in absence of glucagon biosynthesis, all pancreatic glucagon stocks found after DT should theoretically be finished within ?6 h vs. ?17 days in control mice with normal alpha-cell mass (estimated considering the observed pancreatic glucagon contents and glucagon half-life). In agreement with this, we found that although the number of alpha-cells had not increased 1 month after the ablation, the glucagon content per cell had doubled. In this situation, the lack of response of the alpha-cell-ablated pancreata to arginine suggests that the few remaining alpha-cells have reached a maximum secretion capacity or that glucagon biosynthesis is rate limiting, or both. The inability ofGlucagon-DTRmice to ensure normoglucagonemia 1 week after DT, despite having sufficient pancreatic glucagon, indicates that glucagon secretion is limited; however, because two-thirds of normal plasma glucagon level is ensured by just 2% of normal alpha-cell mass, this indicates that alpha-cells display a huge secretory capacity. This property may contribute to the excessive glucagon secretion observed in diabetic patients. Alternatively, our observations also suggest that in normal conditions, with a normal alpha-cell mass, glucagon secretion (relative to alpha-cell number) is very low. It is therefore intriguing to observe that alpha-cells are so numerous. They may somewhat be required for proper endocrine pancreas development. Alternatively, or in addition, their numbers may reflect the effect of selection pressure during evolution: most species must often thrive through long periods of sustained starvation, and glucagon facilitates glucose mobilization during food deprivation. In the latter perspective, the massive loss of alpha-cells, which we report here, was associated with a rapid enhancement of glucagon sensitivity, which allows an increased glucose mobilization likely through glycogenolysis, rather than gluconeogenesis, as revealed with glucose tolerance tests and a tendency to express higher levels of liver GcgR and GP. Interestingly, we have seen that extreme alpha-cell removal in stressful situations, such as prolonged starvation and insulin-induced hypoglycemia, has no obvious consequences on fasting blood glucose and normoglycemia recovery. Furthermore, Unger and colleagues (6) reported that inhibition of glucagon signaling prevented STZ-induced diabetes in mice. By contrast, we show here that near-total alpha-cell ablation does not prevent hyperglycemia, indicating that a minimal fraction of the alpha-cell mass is sufficient to mediate normal glucagon signaling. Together, these combined observations strongly suggest that a total alpha-cell loss, or glucagon-signaling blockade, would be required to prevent hyperglycemia and diabetes after massive beta-cell destruction. Cell-cell signaling between alpha- and beta-cells is thought to be essential for proper blood glucose homeostasis (4), but the direct, physical influence of alpha-cells on glucose-stimulated insulin release has never been studied in vivo. We know beta-cell activity is independent of glucagon signaling because it remains unaltered upon treatment with GcgR antagonists or in GcgR-/-mice (8,23), that is, in situations where alpha-cells are abundant or expanded. In DT-treatedGlucagon-DTRmice, however, almost all islets are totally devoid of alpha-cells, which prevents any paracrine intraislet direct interaction between these two cell types. Yet, glucose homeostasis in this situation is not affected under basal conditions, thus suggesting that local alpha-cell-beta-cell interactions are dispensable for adequate beta-cell function. This conclusion could not be reached in previous studies because the animal model reported here is the first in which adult mice have nearly normal glucagonemia, yet lack most alpha-cells. alpha-Cell hyperplasia has been reported in patients bearing mutations in the GcgR gene (24,25) and in mice exhibiting glucagon deficiency, such as in glucagon-/-, GcgR-/-, and PC2-/-mice, as well as in wild-type mice treated with GcgR-neutralizing antibody (7,8,26-29). In all these situations, the formation of new alpha-cells likely represents a compensatory response to deficient glucagon signaling. The origin of newly formed alpha-cells in glucagon-deficient conditions is not known. The continuous emergence of alpha-cells from pancreatic ductalNeurog-3-expressing cells was reported in mice expressing the beta-cell-specific transcription factor paired box gene 4 (PAX4) in embryonic alpha-cells (30). In these animals, alpha-cells reprogram toward the beta-cell phenotype upon PAX4 misexpression, leading to a substantial reduction in postnatal alpha-cell numbers. The authors proposed that glucagon deficiency was the driving force for the continuous appearance of alpha-cells, yet glucagonemia was not measured in their study, and the alpha-cell deficit was similar to the one observed here in DT-treatedGlucagon-DTRmice. By contrast, there is no evidence for ductal alpha-cell neogenesis inGlucagon-DTRmice: the rare alpha-cells found after DT were never preferentially located within or near ducts. This difference may be attributed to the perturbed metabolic status of mice over-expressing PAX4, which exhibit strong beta-cell hyperplasia and very high insulinemia, likely resulting in an abnormally elevated insulin-to-glucagon balance. We recently reported that adult alpha-cells reprogram to insulin production after extreme beta-cell ablation (13). Here, we explored whether beta-cells can reprogram to produce glucagon after massive alpha-cell loss and failed to observe any such beta- to alpha-cell conversion. However, the interconversion between alpha- and beta-cells may occur in both directions when conditions are appropriate. Indeed, it has been shown that1) the ectopic expression of the alpha-cell-specific transcription factor ARX or2) the conditional inactivation of the DNA methyltransferase geneDnmt1in embryonic beta-cells converts them to the alpha-cell phenotype (31,32). After beta-cell destruction inRIP-DTRmice, ?5% of adult alpha-cells spontaneously undergo cell reprogramming; this limited number of cells probably determines the extent of beta-cell recovery inRIP-DTRtransgenic mice (13). This observation alone makes us speculate that promoting the conversion of most alpha-cells to beta-cells, if it could be achieved, might represent an attractive therapeutic strategy for diabetes, once we learn how to modulate autoimmunity. In this regard, it was unclear what the minimal alpha-cell mass is to ensure enough glucagon production should alpha-cell reprogramming become a therapy to treat diabetes. The present work reveals that 2 to 4% of functional alpha-cells is sufficient to guarantee the glycemic control, at least under basal conditions. Reduction of the alpha-cell pool by reprogramming to beta-cells could have the additional beneficial effect of preventing the glucagon excess typical of type 1 diabetes, which enhances the risk for hyperglycemia and ketoacidosis in patients afflicted with the disease (5). TheGlucagon-DTRtransgenic mice were generated by pronuclear injection, as described (13). Briefly, heparin-binding epidermal growth factor-like growth factor (i.e., the natural receptor to DT, DTR) cDNA was subcloned downstream of a 1.6-kb-long rat glucagon promoter fragment (14). TheRIP-DTR, RIP-CreERT,andR26-YFPmice were previously described (33,34). Animals were housed and cared for according to the guidelines of the Direction Generale de la Sante of the Canton de Geneve. Glucose (1.1 g/kg of body wt; 84100, Sigma, St. Louis, MO), pyruvate (2 g/kg; P2256, Sigma) and glucagon (1 mg/kg; H-6790, Bachem, Bubendorf, Switzerland) were injected intraperitoneally after overnight fasting, when indicated. Insulin (0.5 units/kg; Actrapid, Novo Nordisk A/S, Bagsvaerd, Denmark) was injected after a 6-h fast. Mice were anesthetized with sodium pentothal (100 mg/kg i.p.) and prepared for pancreas perfusion, as described (35,36). Pancreata were perfused with modified Krebs-Ringer HEPES buffer containing 4% dextran (Pharmacosmos, Holbaek, Denmark) and 0.25% BSA at 37 degrees C; the perfusion rate was 1.5 mL/min. For equilibration, the pancreas was perfused for 30 min before collecting the efflux. Glucose and arginine were added to the perfusion buffer as indicated in Figs. 2G-Hand 3C. Insulin was measured using an enzyme immunoassay kit (SPI-BIO, Massy, France). Glucagon was determined by radioimmunoassay using an antiglucagon antibody (Dako Diagnostics, Zug, Switzerland), as described previously (35). Pancreatic glucagon and insulin (immunoassays) and morphometric analyses were performed as described (13,37,38). Paraffin and cryostat sections were 5 mum or 10 mum thick, respectively. The antibodies used were: guinea pig anti-porcine insulin (1:400, Dako), mouse anti-porcine glucagon (1:1,000, Sigma), mouse anti-somatostatin (1:200, Beta Cell Biology Consortium, Nashville, TN), rabbit anti-pancreatic polypeptide (1:200, Bachem), goat anti-glucagon-like peptide 1 (1:200, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA), rabbit anti-green fluorescent protein (1:200, Molecular Probes Inc., Eugene, OR), and anti-phosphohistone H3 (1:400, Millipore Corp., Billerica, MA). Secondary antibodies were coupled to Alexa Fluor dyes 488, 568, or 647 (Molecular Probes, Inc.), to Cy3, or to Cy5 (Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories, Inc., West Grove, PA). Transferase-mediated dUTP nick-end labeling (TUNEL) assay was performed according to manufacturer's instructions (Apoptag, Chemicon, Temecula, CA). Sections were examined with a Leica TCS SPE confocal microscope (Leica Microsystems, Bannockburn, IL). DT (D0564, Sigma) was given to 2-month-old mice in three intraperitoneal injections during 5 days, the second and third doses on days 3 and 5, respectively. Each injection (200 muL) contained 504 ng of DT in 0.9% NaCl. STZ (S0130; Sigma) was administrated in one injection (200 mug/g i.p.) after a 4-h fast. RIP-CreERTmice were given a freshly prepared tamoxifen suspension with a gastric catheter, as previously described (13). Liver samples were frozen in liquid nitrogen and kept at -80 degrees C until use. Fragments of 30 mug were subsequently used for total RNA isolation using the Qiagen RNeasy Mini kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA) with small modifications: due to high glycogen content in hepatocytes, we used 50% ethanol instead of 70% ethanol, as recommended. Four samples per group were analyzed in triplicates, and in a minimum of three independent runs. The quantitative PCR was performed as previously described by us (13), using the following primers:G6Pase forward (5'-GTGGCTGGAGTCTTGTCAGG-3')/reverse (5'-ATTGTAGATGCCCCGGATG-3'),PEPCK forward (5'-GATGACATTGCCTGGATGAA-3')/reverse (5'-CGTTTTCTGCTGGGTTGATAGCC-3'),GcgR forward (5'-ACCAATGCCACCACAACC-3')/reverse (5'-GGAGTACTTGTCGAAGGTTCTGTTAC-3'), andGP forward (5'-ATCAACCCATCCTCCATGTT-3')/reverse (5'-ACATGCAGGCAGTTCAGAAG-3'). Blood samples were collected from the tail vein of mice fasted overnight. One- or two-tailed Mann-WhitneyUtests were used when indicated, using GraphPad Prism 4.00 software (GraphPad, San Diego, CA). Error bars in the figures represent the SEM.