Pregnancy is a unique acquired physiologic state of increased metabolic demand, requiring increased output of insulin by islet beta-cells. This adaptive response is accomplished both through enhanced insulin secretion and by beta-cell proliferation and expansion in mice (1). Failure of adaptive beta-cell expansion underlies dysregulated glucose homeostasis and progression to diabetes mellitus (2). Thus, the mechanisms underlying gestational beta-cell proliferation are a focus of intensive ongoing investigation. Pregnancy hormones are known regulators of beta-cell growth and function (3). The lactogenic hormones prolactin and placental lactogen signal through the prolactin receptor (PRLR) and are crucial regulators of pregnancy adaptation in many maternal tissues (4). PRLR is expressed in both rodent and human pancreatic beta-cells (5), and in vitro treatment of islets with prolactin has established it as a potent beta-cell mitogen in both species (1). Although gene expression studies of islets during pregnancy identified strong induction of some prolactin signaling targets (6-8), the mechanisms underlying lactogen-stimulated changes in beta-cells during pregnancy are incompletely understood. During transient beta-cell proliferation and expansion during gestation, prior studies have reported increased expression of nuclear factors like FoxM1, the cyclin-dependent kinases cyclin A2 and cyclin B1, and MafB (6,9,10). However, the requirement for PRLR signaling to induce expression of these factors and the physiologic significance of the gestational MafB+beta-cell subpopulation are unknown. Studies of beta-cells during pregnancy in humans are confounded by practical and ethical challenges. Thus, animal studies remain critical for understanding beta-cell biology during pregnancy (11). Mouse genetic studies of PRLR support a role in beta-cell development and function; the global PRLR knockout has glucose intolerance and reduced beta-cell mass (12). Unfortunately, the globalPrlrknockout mouse is sterile, precluding pregnancy studies (13). Prlr+/-mice studied during pregnancy develop glucose intolerance and reduction in beta-cell proliferation and mass expansion (14). Nevertheless, as loss of PRLR results in multiple abnormalities in other metabolic tissues that could indirectly influence beta-cell function (15), it is essential to assess the consequences of targeted PRLR inactivation specifically in beta-cells. In this study, we generated a conditionalPrlrallele allowing Cre recombinase-mediated genetic ablation of PRLR signaling and identified a requirement for PRLR in molecular, hormonal, and proliferative adaptations by maternal beta-cells in pregnancy. Collectively, our results suggest PRLR signaling is a master regulator of adaptive beta-cell responses during pregnancy. A targeting vector containingPrlrgenomic DNA encompassing exons 4 through 9 were subcloned into plasmid PL253 containing a thymidine kinase cassette. Using recombineering, loxP and FRT-neo-FRT-loxP cassettes were placed flanking exon 5. The targeting vector was electroporated into C57BL/6J embryonic stem cells and clones selected using G418; validated clones were injected into 129 blastocysts generating chimeric males (Stanford Transgenic Core). Germline transmission ofPrlrfallele was identified by brown fur pups after crossing male chimeras with C57BL/6J females. Mouse tail genomic DNA was digested with NheI and Southern blotting performed with a 5' external probe to confirm a correctly targeted allele. The FRT-flanked neo cassette was removed by crosses withFLPeR mice (The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME), generating floxed PRLR mice (Prlrf/+), which were backcrossed with C57BL/6J mice (The Jackson Laboratory) for more than eight generations. Prlrf/+mice were crossed with mice with a transgene encoding Cre recombinase from rat insulin promoter elements (RIP-Cre) (16). Subsequently,RIP-Cre;Prlrf/+males were crossed withPrlrf/+females, generating betaPRLRKO (PRLRf/f;RIP-Cre) and littermatePrlrf/+,Prlrf/f,RIP-Cre;Prlrf/+, andRIP-Cre;Prlr+/+controls. MafBf/fmice (17) were crossed withRIP-CreNonemice (18) and backcrossed to B6J mice at least six generations (seeSupplementary Table 1: genotyping primers). Mice were weaned 21-25 days after parturition. To avoid potential effects of altered maternal metabolism on offspring during in utero exposure, betaPRLRKO females were solely used as experimental mice. Beginning at 8 weeks of age, betaPRLRKO and control females were mated with wild-type FVB males. Vaginal plugs were scored at gestational day (GD) 0.5 and males removed. All experiments were repeated in at least two independent cohorts of mice. All procedures involving mice were approved and conducted in accordance with the Stanford Administrative Panel on Laboratory Animal Care or Vanderbilt Animal Care and Use Program. Intraperitoneal glucose and insulin tolerance testing were performed as previously described (19). An oral glucose tolerance test (GTT) was performed using a 22-gauge rigid gavage needle to deliver an intragastric glucose bolus of 2 g/kg body weight. Blood was collected by tail vein bleeding. Blood glucose levels were determined by glucometer (Bayer Contour; Bayer). Ad libitum fed or overnight (16 h)-fasted blood glucose levels were measured at 8:30a.m. Serum insulin levels were performed by ELISA (Crystal Chem) following the manufacturer's directions. Islets were isolated using retrograde perfusion of the pancreatic duct with collagenase, purified using density centrifugation, and cultured as previously described (20). Recombinant mouse prolactin (R D Systems) was diluted in culture media to a final concentration of 500 ng/ml. Culture media was changed daily. Microscopy was performed on a Zeiss AxioM1 Fluorescence microscope with AxioVision software (Carl Zeiss). Confocal images were obtained using a Leica Sp2 microscope (Beckman Cell Sciences Imaging Facility; Leica Microsystems). After weighing, the pancreas was fixed, embedded in optimal cutting temperature compound, and then frozen. Tissues were sectioned at 10-um intervals using a Leica 3050S Cryostat (Leica Microsystems). We immunostained tissue with anti-insulin antibody and DAPI and then analyzed sections separated by 200 um. beta-Cell mass was measured using ImageJ (National Institutes of Health) to quantify insulin+and total pancreas area in each section; beta-cell area was the average of nine measured sections. The calculated beta-cell mass = (beta-cell area/total pancreas area) * (total pancreas weight). To measure proliferation, we immunostained tissues using antibodies against insulin and Ki-67 and the proportion of Ki-67+beta-cells calculated as a percentage. At least 1,500 beta-cells were counted for each animal; only clusters containing at least 20 beta-cells were counted. The total number of islets per mouse was the sum of clusters counted in nine analyzed sections. Antibodies used are listed inSupplementary Table 2. Total RNA was isolated using TRIzol (Invitrogen) and reverse transcribed using the Ambion Retroscript Kit (Ambion) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Quantitative RT-PCR (qPCRs) were performed with FastStart Universal Probe Master (Roche) and TaqMan assays (seeSupplementary Table 3) on an ABI 7500 RealTime PCR System (Applied Biosystems). Assays were performed in technical replicates and normalized to mouse actin as a reference standard. Islets were lysed in 2* Bio-Rad loading buffer (Bio-Rad) containing 10% BME and then boiled for 5 min. Following electrophoresis on Bio-Rad TGX 4-20% gels (Bio-Rad), proteins were transferred onto nitrocellulose using the tank apparatus (Bio-Rad). Chemiluminescent detection was performed with SuperSignal West Pico (Thermo) and Carestream Kodak BioMax XAR film (Sigma-Aldrich). Data are presented as means +/- SEM. Statistical significance was determined by unpaired two-tailed Studentttest, repeated-measures ANOVA (RM-ANOVA), or chi2test as indicated using GraphPad Prism 6 (GraphPad Software, LaJolla, CA) or Microsoft Excel (Microsoft, Redmond, WA). To permit targeted PRLR signaling disruption, we generated mice harboring a Cre recombinase-sensitivePrlrfallele (Fig. 1NoneandNone) (seeNone). Intercrosses ofPrlrf/+mice generatedPrlrf/fmice and siblings with expected genotypes in Mendelian ratio (Fig. 1Noneand data not shown). To generate mice lacking PRLR in pancreatic beta-cells (abbreviated betaPRLRKO mice), we bredRIP-Cremice toPrlrfmice (seeNone). qPCR revealed thatPrlrmRNA levels were reduced greater than 95% in islets from betaPRLRKO females as compared with littermatePrlrf/fcontrols (Fig. 1None). Immunohistology and Western blotting demonstrated that beta-cell PRLR protein was reduced or almost undetectable in virgin or pregnant female betaPRLRKO mice (Fig. 1NoneandNone). Conception, nursing, and rearing of pups by betaPRLRKO mothers was similar to that of controls (seegestational diabetes mellitus in betaprlrko mice). Thus, thePrlrf/fmice permitted conditional genetic inactivation ofPrlrin vivo. Conditional inactivation of PRLR signaling in pancreatic beta-cells (betaPRLRKO). A: Schematic diagram (not to scale) depicting thePrlrgene locus, targeting vector sequence, andPrlrfallele structure (seeNone). B: Southern blot of genomic DNA from mice demonstrating germline transmission ofPrlrf. Introduction of a NheI site downstream of the loxP cassette resulted in a 9-kb (targeted allele) rather than a 16-kb fragment (wild-type [WT] allele). C: Genotyping PCR of a litter depicting representative progeny of all potentialPrlrgenotypes following a cross ofPrlrf/+mice. D: mRNA levels ofPrlrin betaPRLRKO females (RIP-Cre;Prlrf/f) and control littermates (Prlrf/f). n= 6 mice/group. E: Immunofluorescence images of islets from betaPRLRKO female and control mice stained for PRLR and insulin (scale bar, 100 mum). F: Western blot of PRLR expression from islets isolated from virgin betaPRLRKO female and controls. Actin was used as a loading control. **P less than = 0.01 byttest. We next investigated the consequences of disrupting beta-cell PRLR signaling on glucose homeostasis. Adult virgin female and male betaPRLRKO mice did not show alterations in glucose tolerance, weight, or beta-cell mass, in contrast to defects observed in globalPrlrknockout mice (Fig. 2None) (data not shown). Ad libitum fed glucose and insulin levels, insulin tolerance, and total pancreas mass also did not differ in 2- to 3-month-old virgin betaPRLRKO females compared with age-matched controls (Supplementary Fig. 1None-None), the age when all subsequent pregnancy studies were performed. betaPRLRKO females have GDM. Virgin betaPRLRKO females and control littermates were followed through pregnancy, postpartum, and a second pregnancy. A: GTT. B: Body weights. C: beta-Cell mass in virgin females. D-I: Glucose tolerance with corresponding area under the curve (AUC) for each genotype and ad libitum fed and overnight fasted glucose for betaPRLRKO females and controls. DandE: First pregnancy. FandG: Postpartum. HandI: Second pregnancy. n= 5-8 mice/group. *P less than 0.05, **P less than = 0.01, ***P less than = 0.001 for RM-ANOVA (GTT) orttest (blood glucose). By contrast, we observed pronounced defects of glucose regulation in pregnant betaPRLRKO females. Maternal insulin demand peaks late in pregnancy, ?GD16.5 (10). On GD16.5, we observed marked glucose intolerance in betaPRLRKO females (Fig. 2None) compared with control females (Prlrf/+andPrlrf/f). We also observed glucose intolerance inRIP-Cre;Prlrf/+mice (Fig. 2None). Blood glucose levels during ad libitum feeding were also elevated in GD16.5 betaPRLRKO mice (Fig. 2None). Expression ofPrlrmRNA inRIP-Cre;Prlrf/+mice was intermediate between betaPRLRKO and control females (Supplementary Fig. 2None). However, weight gain in pregnancy and litter sizes of betaPRLRKO mothers were indistinguishable from that of controls (Supplementary Fig. 2NoneandNone). Following parturition, betaPRLRKO mothers lactated normally and nursed pups to weaning without impact on offspring survival rates (data not shown). Subsequent postpartum analyses showed that glucose intolerance and ad libitum glucose abnormalities in pregnant betaPRLRKO mice resolved (Fig. 2NoneandNone), a characteristic feature of gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM). Because some mouse strains harboring aRIP-Cretransgene develop glucose homeostasis abnormalities (21), we also evaluatedRIP-Crelittermate controls but did not observe any differences in glucose tolerance in virgin, pregnant, or postpartum mice compared with controls (Fig. 2None,None, andNone). Thus, betaPRLRKO mice developed GDM. Because GDM increases the risk of dysglycemia in future pregnancies, we investigated the effects of additional pregnancy on glucose regulation in betaPRLRKO multigravida. During a second gestation in betaPRLRKO females, glucose intolerance (Fig. 2None) and hyperglycemia in ad libitum feeding recurred (Fig. 2None). betaPRLRKO females also developed evidence of worsened glucose control, including glycemia greater than 200 mg/dL upon completion of the GTT (Fig. 2None) and fasting hyperglycemia (Fig. 2None), features not observed in the first pregnancy (Fig. 2None). Thus, we observed that glucose control worsened with additional pregnancies in betaPRLRKO mice, similar to humans with multigravidity or GDM (22). To identify the basis for GDM in betaPRLRKO mothers, we assessed insulin output and beta-cell growth, features known to undergo adaptive enhancement in pregnancy (1). We found reduced serum insulin levels in betaPRLRKO mice during GTT in late gestation (GD16.5), consistent with relative insulin deficiency (Fig. 3NoneandNone). We sought to understand the basis for this relative insulin deficiency by examining insulin secretion in islets isolated from mice at GD16.5. Islets from betaPRLRKO or control mice showed similar basal and glucose-stimulated insulin secretion (GSIS), normalized to insulin content (Fig. 3None), indicating the insulin deficiency observed in vivo was not a consequence of reduced GSIS. Insulin tolerance was also unchanged in betaPRLRKO mothers at this gestational stage, excluding altered peripheral insulin sensitivity (Supplementary Fig. 3None). Next, we used the cellular marker Ki-67 to quantify beta-cell proliferation and observed a threefold reduction of beta-cell labeling in islets of GD16.5 betaPRLRKO mice compared with controls (Fig. 3NoneandNone). No change in total islet number was observed (Supplementary Fig. 3None). betaPRLRKO females have reduced beta-cell proliferation and mass during pregnancy. Serum insulin levels during GTT (A) and corresponding area under the curve (AUC) measurements (B) in GD16.5 pregnant betaPRLRKO females and controls (Prlrf/f). n= 4 mice/group. **P less than = 0.01 byttest. C: GSIS on islets isolated from GD16.5 betaPRLRKO females (n= 4) and controls (n= 6). D: Representative islet images of GD16.5 pancreas sections from betaPRLRKO females and controls with Ki-67 immunofluorescence, insulin, and DAPI (scale bar, 100 mum). E: The percentage of beta-cells with Ki-67+nuclei staining in nonpregnant (N) and pregnant (P) (GD16.5) betaPRLRKO females and controls. F: Representative images of pancreas sections from GD16.5 betaPRLRKO females and controls used for beta-cell area. Insulin immunofluorescence (green) and DAPI (blue) (scale bar, 2 mm). G: Calculated beta-cell mass in GD16.5 betaPRLRKO,RIP-Cre, PrlrNone, and control (Prlrf/f) females. n= 3 or 4 mice/group. *P less than 0.05 byttest. Consistent with the observed reduction of Ki-67+beta-cells in pregnant betaPRLRKO mice, beta-cell area and mass were reduced approximately twofold compared with pregnantPrlrf/fandRIP-Crecontrols (Fig. 3NoneandNoneandSupplementary Fig. 3NoneandNone). Compared with nonpregnant betaPRLRKO females (Fig. 2None) (0.89 +/- 0.06 mg), pregnant betaPRLRKO females (Fig. 3None) (1.91 +/- 0.16 mg) exhibited a significant increase of beta-cell mass during pregnancy (P =0.004), suggesting PRLR-independent mechanisms of gestational mass expansion are active yet insufficient to compensate for the loss of PRLR signaling. Thus, loss of PRLR led to reduced beta-cell proliferation and mass expansion in pregnant betaPRLRKO. To investigate the molecular basis of reduced gestational beta-cell proliferation in betaPRLRKO mice, we measured gene expression. Gestational induction of known PRLR signaling targets likePrlritself and cytokine-inducible Src homology 2-containing protein (Cish), a negative regulator of PRLR signaling (8), was markedly reduced as expected (Fig. 4None). Tryptophan hydroxylase 1 (Tph1) is highly induced by pregnancy in beta-cells (6,23) and catalyzes the rate-limiting step of islet serotonin synthesis. In turn, serotonin contributes to beta-cell proliferation through autocrine and paracrine effects (6). In betaPRLRKO pregnant mice, isletTph1induction was eliminated (Fig. 4None), and immunoreactive serotonin in islets was absent during gestation (Fig. 4None). Thus, beta-cell PRLR is required for islet serotonin production during pregnancy. Prior work suggests that lactogens alter expression of genes encoding beta-cell cyclins, cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors, and transcription factorsFoxm1andFoxd3(4,10,24-26). In betaPRLRKO pregnant females, qPCR with isolated islets at GD16.5 revealed reductions inCcna2,Ccnb1,Ccnb2, andCcnd1(which, respectively, encode cyclins A2, B1, B2, and D1), andFoxm1, all previously implicated as regulators of gestational beta-cell proliferation (6,8,10) (Fig. 4None). By contrast, we found that expression ofCcnd2(Fig. 4None),Men1,Cdkn2c(p18),Cdkn1b(p27), andFoxd3(Supplementary Fig. 4None), which prior studies indicate are regulated by lactogen signaling in pregnancy (24-27), were unaffected in betaPRLRKO islets at GD16.5. Moreover, reducedFoxd3expression during gestation (24) still occurred in betaPRLRKO females, indicating PRLR signaling is not required forFoxd3downregulation in pregnancy (Supplementary Fig. 4None). Collectively, our in vivo targeted genetic studies demonstrate that PRLR signaling is required for serotonin signaling and gene expression changes controlling adaptive maternal beta-cell expansion. Altered cell cycle regulators and serotonin signaling in betaPRLRKO islets during pregnancy. mRNA levels ofPrlrandCish(A) andTph1(B) in nonpregnant (N) or pregnant (P) betaPRLRKO females (black bars) and controls (open bars). C: Immunofluorescence of islet serotonin, insulin, and DAPI (scale bar, 50 mum). D: Relative mRNA levels ofCcna2,Ccnb1,Ccnb2,Ccnd1,Ccnd2, andFoxm1in betaPRLRKO females and controls at GD16.5. E: Confocal immunofluorescence images of islets from GD16.5 betaPRLRKO females and controls (original magnification *40). MafB (red), insulin (green), and DAPI (blue) with MafB+Ins+cells highlighted (white arrows). For mRNA studies, pregnant samples were from GD16.5 and expression levels normalized to nonpregnant controls = 1.n= 3-8 mice/group. *P less than 0.05, **P less than = 0.01 byttest. To assess the formal possibility that GDM might indirectly alter gene expression in pregnant betaPRLRKO mice, we measured the response of isolated betaPRLRKO islets to lactogen treatment in vitro. PRLR activates several intracellular pathways, including Jak2/Stat5, a major mediator of its signal transduction (28). As expected, purified mouse prolactin robustly induced phosphorylation of Stat5 in control islets (Supplementary Fig. 4None). By contrast, phospho-Stat5 was reduced in islets fromRIP-Cre;Prlrf/+mice and absent in betaPRLRKO islets treated with prolactin (Supplementary Fig. 4None). We next examined gene expression in cultured islets treated with prolactin for 24 h in concentrations comparable to peak lactogen levels in pregnancy (29). In controls, PRLR target genes, includingPrlr,Cish, andTph1, were induced to levels similar to those at GD16.5; this induction was eliminated in betaPRLRKO islets (Supplementary Fig. 4None). FoxM1 expression was reported to increase in whole islets exposed in vitro to placental lactogen (10), but we did not detect consistent FoxM1 induction after treatment of islets with lactogens up to 4 days in culture (data not shown). These in vitro data are consistent with gene expression changes of betaPRLRKO islets observed in vivo and suggest that altered expression of PRLR target genes reflects disrupted intrinsic islet signaling, not secondary effects of altered metabolism in GDM. In pancreatic islets from adult mice, the transcription factor MafB is exclusively expressed in alpha-cells (30), except during pregnancy when we detected transient expression in a subset of beta-cells (9). This contrasts with MafB expression within both alpha-cells and beta-cells during development (30,31). The physiologic significance of MafB expression in beta-cells during pregnancy was unknown. We observed that up to 25% of maternal insulin+(abbreviated Ins+) cells produced MafB by GD16.5 (Supplementary Fig. 5None). MafB+beta-cells diminished by postpartum day 7 and were undetectable by postpartum day 28 (Supplementary Fig. 5None). The maternal MafB+Ins+cells at GC16.5 also produced Pdx1, a key transcription factor and regulator of beta-cells (Supplementary Fig. 5None). MafB expression in adult alpha-cells promotes glucagon production, but we did not observe bihormonal Ins+Glucagon+cells in maternal islets (data not shown). Strikingly, we found that MafB+beta-cells were absent from maternal betaPRLRKO islets at GD16.5 or other gestational stages (Fig. 4Noneand data not shown). Thus, beta-cell MafB expression in pregnancy requires PRLR signaling. To identify physiologic roles for MafB in maternal beta-cells, we generated a beta-cell-specific deletion of MafB (betaMafBKO) (seeNone). Nonpregnant betaMafBKO mice had normal glucose tolerance (Fig. 5None), but showed glucose intolerance during pregnancy compared with controlMafBf/fmice (Fig. 5None). This glucose intolerance was similar to that in betaPRLRKO mice (Fig. 2). Additionally, both beta-cell proliferation (Fig. 5None) and mass (Fig. 5None) were reduced in betaMafBKO mice during pregnancy but not in virgin females. betaMafBKO mice have GDM, reduced beta-cell proliferation, and gene expression changes that overlap with betaPRLRKO mice. GTT in betaMafBKO females (MafBf/f;RIP-CreNone) and controls (MafBf/f) as virgins (A) and during pregnancy (B) at GD15.5. The percentage of Ki-67+nuclei within beta-cells (Ki-67+Ins+/total Ins+cells) (C) and beta-cell mass (mg) in virgin and GD15.5 betaMafBKO and controls (D). E: Relative mRNA levels ofFoxM1,Ccna2,Ccnb1, andCcnb2in nonpregnant (N) or GD15.5 (P) betaMafBKO females and controls. Expression levels were normalized to N controls = 1.n= 3-8 mice/group. *P less than 0.05, **P less than = 0.01 for RM-ANOVA (GTT) orttest. Like betaPRLRKO mice, pregnant betaMafBKO mice failed to induceFoxm1,Ccna2, orCcnb1in pregnancy (Fig. 5None). Although levels ofCcnb2mRNA increased with pregnancy in betaMafBKO females, this induction was blunted compared with pregnant controls (Fig. 5None). TheRIP-CreNoneallele used to generate betaMafBKO mice also encodes human growth hormone that can activate PRLR signaling (32). Consistent with these prior findings, we observed significant elevations of PRLR signaling targetsCishandTph1in nonpregnant femaleRIP-CreNonemice (Supplementary Fig. 5None). By contrast,Prlrexpression in nonpregnant betaMafBKO was similar to controls and was significantly induced during pregnancy. However, the induction was blunted compared with pregnant controls, includingRIP-CreNonepregnant females (Supplementary Fig. 5None). Despite this apparent partial activation of PRLR signaling, female betaMafBKO mice did not show elevatedFoxm1orCcna2levels at baseline, and induction of both genes during pregnancy was blunted compared with pregnantRIP-CreNonecontrols (Fig. 5NoneandSupplementary Fig. 5None). Moreover, despite elevatedTph1expression, betaMafBKO islets showed clear reduction of serotonin compared with control mice at GD16.5 (Supplementary Fig. 5None). Thus, maternal islet serotonin production requires MafB expression in gestation. Together with our finding that MafB induction fails in betaPRLRKO mothers, these data indicate that MafB is regulated by PRLR signaling and required for beta-cell adaptations during pregnancy. Genetic and cell biology studies have suggested that PRLR signaling is a crucial regulator of beta-cell expansion (12,14,29,33), but prior loss-of-function studies were performed in global PRLR knockouts rather than examining PRLR loss specifically in beta-cells. Our studies reveal a clear requirement for PRLR in beta-cell function in vivo. A prior study of conventional PRLR knockout mice identified glucose intolerance, reduced body weight, and reduced beta-cell mass in adult mice of both sexes (12), but it was unclear if these reflected islet or nonislet effects. By contrast, we observed normal glucose homeostasis and beta-cell mass in adult prepartum betaPRLRKO mice and no alteration in adult body weight. Our results suggest that defective PRLR signaling in nonislet tissues likely contributes to body weight and glucose homeostasis abnormalities previously observed in nonpregnant mice with global PRLR knockout. Some of these differences may also be related to genetic background differences between 129Svand B6 mouse strains, known to affect PRLR-dependent phenotypes (34). Additional studies have indicated a role for PRLR signaling in fetal and early postnatal islet development (35). RIP-Creexpression commences in the fetal pancreas and has been used by us and others to inactivate beta-cell genes in the fetal and neonatal period (20). Thus, betaPRLRKO mice might be predicted to display defective developmental expansion of beta-cells; however, virgin adult betaPRLRKO mice displayed no alteration in beta-cell mass. Further studies are required to assess the role of PRLR in embryonic or perinatal beta-cell development. PRLR signaling is thought to involve transduction through multiple effectors, including signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 (Stat5). However, mice carrying a beta-cell-specific deletion ofStat5did not develop GDM (36). Thus, although Stat5 is considered a principal mediator of PRLR signaling, our results suggest that other signal transduction pathways such as mitogen-activated protein kinase/extracellular signal-regulated kinase or phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/Akt (4) are critical for gestational beta-cell adaptation. Supporting this model, recent studies have demonstrated that prolactin induction ofTph1is coordinated by activation of all three pathways (37). beta-Cell-specific deletion ofTph1has been reported, but gestational studies were not performed (38). Mice with pancreas-specific deletion ofFoxm1display profound GDM, but also exhibit prepregnancy defects in beta-cell mass that likely reflectFoxm1roles in physiological beta-cell proliferation (10,39). Collectively, these prior studies support the view that targets of PRLR signaling regulate gestational beta-cell expansion. The significance of MafB+beta-cells during pregnancy was previously unknown. Our studies demonstrate intact PRLR signaling is required for the induction of MafB in a subset of beta-cells during pregnancy. In this study, we report that MafB expression is necessary for proliferation of beta-cells in pregnancy. Moreover, MafB was required for pregnancy-induced islet serotonin production andFoxm1upregulation. Prior studies identified roles for MafB in islet development and postnatal expansion, in which it regulates terminal differentiation and maturation (17,31); a role for MafB in proliferation has also been established in pathological settings (40). Our studies reveal a role in physiologic proliferation of gestation, in which MafB+beta-cells maintain their hallmark features, including production of insulin and Pdx1 and suppression of glucagon. This contrasts with re-expression of MafB in alpha-like beta-cells observed afterPdx1orFoxo1loss, in which beta-cell dedifferentiation contributes to diabetes pathogenesis (41). Thus, in normal pregnancy, transient expression of MafB by Ins+cells does not appear to reflect dedifferentiation. Future studies will be necessary to identify the specific mechanisms by whichMafB,Foxm1, andTph1coordinate and control proliferation and mass expansion during gestation. We and others have previously described additional putative PRLR signaling targets, includingMen1,p18, p27, andFoxd3(14,25,26,42). For example, we found prolactin was sufficient to induceMen1gene expression changes in islets and thatMen1induction was sufficient to impair maternal beta-cell expansion (25). However, in betaPRLRKO pregnant mice, we did not detect altered expression ofMen1,p18, orp27, suggesting PRLR signaling is not necessary for regulating these factors. These findings may reflect differences intrinsic to gain- and loss-of-function models, in vitro and in vivo experimentation, mouse strain differences, or yet-unidentified modifying factors that contribute to the regulation of these genes during pregnancy. Pregnancy is a complex, transient, polyhormonal state, and our findings highlight the importance of in vivo loss-of-function models for genetic analysis of putative target genes. Brouwers et al. (32) report of human growth hormone minigene effects on islets in mice harboring transgenes likeRIP-CreNonehighlights the importance of usingRIP-CreNonecontrol littermates in physiologic studies. The betaPRLRKO mice lack the very receptor believed to mediate the augmentation of beta-cell mass by human growth hormone (32). Thus, the betaPRLRKO model should be resistant to possible confounding changes caused by theRIP-Cretransgene. Prior studies suggest that human beta-cells expand in pregnancy, but the molecular and cellular basis of this is not clear (43,44). For example, Butler et al. (43) have suggested that this expansion may reflect beta-cell neogenesis rather than proliferation, a possibility consistent with the recent finding of maternal beta-cell neogenesis in rodents (10,45). A recent study identified single nucleotide polymorphisms in the 5' untranslated region ofPRLRassociated with GDM risk in humans (46). Intriguingly, induction ofTPH1and islet serotonin also occurs in human pregnancy (6), but it is not known whether this reflects increased beta-cell PRLR signaling. However, PRLR expression is much lower in human than rodent beta-cells (47), and MafB expression, although restricted to alpha-cells in adult rodents, is also present in beta-cells from a nonpregnant human (48). Other correlative studies have implicated a more general role for PRLR signaling in human glucose control and metabolism. Higher prolactin levels are associated with a reduced risk of glucose intolerance and diabetes in both men and women (49). A humanPRLRdisease-associated mutation causing familial hyperprolactinemia (50) was recently described, although information on diabetes or glucose homeostasis in this family was not reported. Thus, further studies are needed to assess the role of PRLR signaling in human beta-cell biology in both gestational and nongestational settings. In summary, we produced and characterized mice lacking PRLR in beta-cells during gestation and found these mice developed hallmark features of GDM. These studies establish the in vivo requirement of PRLR in beta-cells for serotonin production and for modulating expression of genes critical for beta-cell proliferation during pregnancy and identify a novel role for MafB in gestational proliferation. PRLR signaling is thought to modulate the development and function of many tissues (5), including bone, immunity, adipose metabolism, and breast and prostate cancer pathogenesis (15). Thus, the conditionalPrlrfallele developed in this study will be useful to examine PRLR signaling in other settings relevant to human health.