Specification of cell types is dictated by few master regulators that activate lineage-specific transcriptional networks. This concept is underscored by studies in which overexpression of a small set of transcription factors can reprogram fibroblasts (or other cells) into a variety of cell types that closely resemble pluripotent cells, neurons, pancreatic beta cells, cardiomyocytes or hematopoietic cells (Takahashi Yamanaka,2006; Iedaet al,2010; Huanget al,2011; Kimet al,2011; Pereiraet al,2013). Hematopoietic and cardiovascular systems are important targets for cell-based therapies due to the high morbidity and mortality associated with blood and heart diseases; however, so far,in vitrogeneration of transplantable cells for treating these diseases has not been successful. Blood cells, vasculature and the heart share not only an intimate functional relationship, but also a common origin in Flk1+mesoderm (Fehlinget al,2003; Huberet al,2004; Iidaet al,2005; Kattmanet al,2006). Although many regulators of the blood and circulatory system have been discovered, it is unclear how the divergence of these lineages in multipotent cardiovascular mesoderm is orchestrated and how their cell identity is solidified. Although several specific epigenetic modifications have been associated with activation or repression of the regulatory regions of genes (Cuiet al,2009; Creyghtonet al,2010; Zentneret al,2011), to what degree they cause, or are the consequence of, gene activation/repression by cell type-specific transcription factors is still unclear. The embryonic hematopoietic system is established in multiple waves, starting with the generation of lineage-restricted progenitors in the yolk sac and culminating in the emergence of multipotent hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells (HS/PC) in the major vessels in the yolk sac (Liet al,2005; Yoshimotoet al,2011), aorta-gonad mesonephros (AGM) region (Northet al,1999; De Bruijnet al,2000; Zoveinet al,2008; Chenet al,2009; Bertrandet al,2010; Boissetet al,2010; Kissa Herbomel,2010) and the placenta (Rhodeset al,2008). The Ets factor Etv2/ER71/Etsrp first distinguishes the hemato-vascular lineages from cardiac mesoderm by specifying endothelium (Leeet al,2008; Sumanaset al,2008; Kataokaet al,2011) and activates the bHLH factor Scl/Tal1, which confers hemogenic identity to endothelium (Van Handelet al,2012). Scl also has a less well understood but important function in repressing the cardiac fate (Schoenebecket al,2007; Ismailogluet al,2008; Van Handelet al,2012). Inducible overexpression of Scl during ES cell differentiation resulted in the expansion of hematopoietic lineage at the expense of cardiac and paraxial mesoderm (Ismailogluet al,2008), while the analysis of Scl knockout (SclNone) embryos revealed robust generation of ectopic cardiomyocytes in yolk sac vasculature, verifying a physiological role for Scl in cardiac repression (Van Handelet al,2012). The requirement for Scl to repress cardiogenesis in hemogenic tissues was restricted to early midgestation of mouse development, suggesting the presence of epigenetic or other contributing mechanisms that solidify the fate choice. Scl also prevented misspecification of endocardium and cushion mesenchymal cells to cardiomyocytes. Although these studies pointed to a critical requirement for Scl in cardiac repression, it remained unknown whether Scl or its downstream targets repress cardiogenesis. Scl functions in a multi-factor complex with Gata factors 1 or 2, E2A, Ldb1 and Lmo2 (Wadmanet al,1997) that promotes gene activation in hematopoietic cells (Tripicet al,2009; Yuet al,2009; Xuet al,2012). Gata2 functions in HS/PC generation and survival (De Pateret al,2013; Gaoet al,2013) whereas Gata1 regulates the maturation of erythroid, megakaryocytic and eosinophilic lineages (Bresnicket al,2012), although there is redundancy between these factors (Takahashiet al,2000). Embryos deficient for both Gata1 and Gata2 lack all blood cells, similar to Scl knockout embryos (Fujiwaraet al,2004). However, it is unknown whether hematopoietic Gata factors cooperate with Scl to repress cardiomyogenesis. Here we show that Scl-dependent activation of hematopoietic fate and repression of cardiac fate during mesoderm diversification is accompanied by Scl binding to hematopoietic and cardiac enhancers that were epigenetically primed for activation in mesoderm. Our findings suggest that the accessibility and decommissioning of Scl-regulated enhancers is determined by modulation of active rather than repressive epigenetic modifications and is a major determinant of available fate choices and developmental stage specificity of target genes. We discovered a distinct subset of Scl-regulated enhancers that are also accessible for cardiac transcription factors in mesoderm, and propose that these enhancers serve as a platform where the fate choice between mutually exclusive fates is determined. Although hematopoietic Gata factors can bind with Scl to both activated and repressed enhancers, their function becomes critical only for activating genes required for HS/PC emergence from hemogenic endothelium. Elucidation of the stepwise process of how master regulators exploit the epigenetic landscape to establish hematopoietic or cardiovascular cell types from multipotent mesoderm provides new insights into improving directed differentiation and lineage reprogramming of stem/progenitor cells of these lineages for regenerative medicine. To understand how Scl specifies hemogenic endothelium while simultaneously repressing the cardiac fate, we defined Scl target genes by combining gene expression and chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing (ChIP-seq) analysis on Flk1+mesodermal cells differentiated from mouse ES cells (Supplementary Fig S1A). Scl binding associated genes (4,393 binding sites associated with 4,158 genes within 200 kb from transcriptional start sites) (Supplementary Table S1A) were intersected with Scl-dependent genes (592 and 553 genes that were significantly up- or down-regulated in mesoderm upon Scl expression (P-value less than 0.05, fold change less than 1.5, see details inSupplementary Fig S1A-C,Supplementary Table S1BandC, and Supplementary Materials and Methods). Integrated analysis showed Scl binding to 57% of the activated and 29% of the repressed genes in mesoderm (Fig1A,Supplementary Table S1BandC), which is significantly higher than would be expected by random chance (P-values 4.08 * 10-103and 3.91 * 10-10, respectively). The genes in activated/bound group were enriched for GO term hematopoiesis, including key hematopoietic transcription factorsRunx1,Gata2,cMybandCfba2t3/Eto2(Fig1B-D). The genes in repressed/bound group were enriched for GO term heart development, including cardiac transcription factorsGata4,Gata6andTbx3(Fig1B-D). Quantitative RT-PCR and ChIP-PCR verified Scl-dependent expression and Scl binding with both activated and repressed genes (Fig1EandF). Scl binds to both its activated and repressed target genes in Flk1+mesodermNoneNoneNoneNoneNoneNoneNoneNoneVenn diagram showing the number of Scl binding sites and overlap with Scl activated and repressed genes in Flk1+MES (mesoderm) documents that Scl binds to both Scl-dependent activated and repressed genes. DAVID (Huanget al,2007) GO enrichment analysis for Scl-bound and activated or Scl-bound and repressed genes shows enrichment of hematopoietic and heart-related terms, respectively. Gene expression heatmaps of selected genes from the bound and activated and bound and repressed groups show activation of key hematopoietic target genes and repression of key cardiac target genes in Scl-expressing mesoderm as compared to Scl-deficient mesoderm. Control [Scl+/hCD4, divided into Scl-expressing (Scl+) and non-expressing cells (Scl-)] andSclNoneEBs are shown. Scl and control IgG ChIP-seq tracks show examples of Scl binding sites near hematopoietic (Runx1andGata2) and cardiac (Gata4andGata6) genes in Flk1+mesoderm (MES). Verification of Scl binding sites marked with asterisks in (D) using ChIP-PCR, average enrichment of at least three independent biological experiments over negative control region (chr16: 92230219-92230338) with SEM are shown. Verification of Scl-dependent gene expression using qRT-PCR. Average of three biological replicates with SD are shown. Venn diagrams show the number of potential 'extended activated' and 'extended repressed' Scl target genes by intersecting genes associated with Scl binding in Flk1+MES with Scl activated and repressed genes from day 4 EBs, E9.5 yolk sac, placenta and endocardium (Van Handelet al,2012). Heatmaps show Scl binding to majority of activated hematopoietic and repressed cardiac transcription factors and other proteins. See alsoSupplementary Fig S1andSupplementary Table S1A-E.As the expression analysis in day 4 EB Flk1+cells was limited to genes that were immediately activated or repressed upon Scl induction in mesoderm, we extended the analysis of Scl-dependent genes to those that became differentially expressed in endothelium in the yolk sac or the placenta, or endocardium in the heart inSclNoneembryos (Van Handelet al,2012). This analysis yielded an extended list of 3,709 Scl-dependent activated and 2,839 Scl-dependent repressed genes, of which 1,100 (29.6%) and 715 (25.2%) (Supplementary Fig S1A,Supplementary Table S1DandE) were bound by Scl in Flk1+mesoderm (Fig1G), which is significantly higher than would be randomly expected (P-values 2.75 * 10-83and 4.44 * 10-25, respectively). Analysis of the 'extended activated' genes showed that Scl binds to regulatory regions of the majority (33/39) of known hematopoietic transcription factors, many (48/57) surface markers and other proteins characteristic of nascent HS/PCs and hemogenic endothelium such asCD41(Itga2b) andCdh5(VE-cadherin) (Fig1H). Scl binding was also associated with many (18/29) cardiac transcription factors (Gata4,Gata6,Hand1andTbx5),PDGFRalpha, a marker for cardiogenic mesoderm and ectopic cardiomyogenic precursors inSclNoneembryos (Van Handelet al,2012), and cardiomyocyte contractile proteins (Tnnc1,Tnnt2,Tnni1andTtn) (Fig1H). These data showed that during mesoderm diversification, Scl binds to a broad network of genes that govern hematopoietic and cardiac development, including the master transcription factors of each lineage. To verify that the ES cellin vitrodifferentiation system recapitulates ectopic cardiomyogenesis in Scl-deficient endothelial precursors,SclNoneand wild-type ES cells were differentiated toward mesodermal lineages and assayed for differentiation potential and gene expression. SclNoneES cells with doxycycline-inducible Scl overexpression (SclNoneiScl) were included to assess whether reintroduction of Scl is sufficient to reverse the phenotype. As expected, both wild-type andSclNoneiSclEBs, but notSclNoneEBs, could generate CD41+c-Kit+hematopoietic progenitors by day 7 (Supplementary Fig S1D). Likewise, Tie2+CD31+endothelial precursors isolated from day 4.75 EBs from wild-type andSclNoneiSclcells, but notSclNonecells, robustly generated CD45+CD11b+/-hematopoietic cells on OP9 stroma (Supplementary Fig S1E). SclNoneTie2+CD31+endothelial precursors readily differentiated to troponin T-expressing cardiomyocytes, whereas re-expression of Scl abolished the ectopic cardiogenic potential in ES cell-derived endothelial cells (Supplementary Fig S1E). These data were reinforced by qRT-PCR analysis that verified the lack of expression of hematopoietic transcription factors and ectopic induction of cardiac factors in Scl-deficient endothelium, and rescue of these molecular defects by Scl overexpression (Supplementary Fig S1F). These data validate the ES cellin vitrodifferentiation system as a suitable model to study Scl-dependent cardiac repression and ectopic cardiogenesis from endothelial precursors. Analysis of genomic locations of Scl binding showed that the majority of Scl binding sites in Flk1+mesoderm reside away from transcriptional start site (TSS) (Fig2A), suggesting that Scl functions through enhancer elements. This was most pronounced in the repressed genes, where only 3% of Scl binding sites were found within 5 kb of TSS. We thus correlated Scl mesodermal binding sites with published datasets for cardiac enhancers, including the Vista Enhancer database that containsin vivoexperimentally verified enhancers (Viselet al,2007) and ChIP-seq analysis for co-activator p300, a marker of enhancers (Viselet al,2009), in E11.5 mouse hearts (Blowet al,2010). Intersecting these data with Scl binding sites in Flk1+mesoderm revealed Scl binding in 10-16% of all putative cardiac enhancers, which is significantly (P = 8.6E-5) higher than the overlap with enhancers in other tissues (Fig2Band C). Analysis of well-established enhancers of cardiac transcription factorsMyocardinandNkx2.5(Fig2D) (Lienet al,1999; Creemerset al,2006) and hematopoietic regulatorsRunx1(+23 enhancer) (Nottinghamet al,2007) andGata2(+9.5 enhancer) (Wozniaket al,2007; Gaoet al,2013) (Supplementary Fig S2A) showed clear overlap with Scl binding. Scl binds to enhancers that have been primed for activation in mesodermNoneNoneNoneNoneNoneNoneNoneNoneDistribution of Scl binding sites relative to TSS in Scl-bound activated or repressed genes shows that majority of Scl binding sites locate away from TSS. Chi-square test was used to assess differences in the distribution. Percent of tissue-specific enhancers validated by LacZ reporter mice (Vista enhancer browser) that overlap with Scl MES binding sites shows that Scl binds to experimentally verified heart enhancers more often compared to enhancers from other tissues. Percent of Scl MES binding sites that overlap with heart enhancers in E11.5 embryos defined by p300 binding (Blowet al,2010) is higher than overlap with enhancers from other tissues. Scl MES binding sites overlap with experimentally verified heart-specific enhancers upstream ofMyocardinandNkx2.5genes and with hematopoietic enhancers withinRunx1andGata2genes. Percent of enhancers from different cardiac developmental stages identified by H3K4me1 (enhancers) and H3K4me1 combined with H3k27ac (active enhancers) (Wamstadet al,2012) that overlap with Scl MES binding sites. Average H3K4me1 (left) and H3K27ac (right) profiles around all 4,393 Scl binding sites show tissue-specific enrichment in Flk1+mesoderm (MES), cardiac precursors (CP) and cardiomyocytes (CM) but not in ESC (mouse ES cells) mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEF) and embryonic limbs (LIMB). Correlation analysis of H3K4me1 (left) and H3K27ac (right) levels between WT andSclNoneMES and ES cells and MES (Wamstadet al,2012) around 4,393 Scl binding sites shows that establishment of these marks occurs independently of Scl. Scl, H3K4me1 and H3K27ac ChIP-seq tracks show comparable levels of H3K4me1 and H3K27ac in WT andSclNonemesoderm around cardiac (Gata6,Tbx5) and hematopoietic (Eto2,Gfi1b) genes. To assess the epigenetic state of Scl-bound enhancers, 4,393 Scl mesodermal binding sites were assessed for the average levels of histone modifications associated with enhancers (H3K4me1) and active enhancers (H3K4me1 and H3K27ac) (Creyghtonet al,2010; Wamstadet al,2012) during ES cell differentiation to cardiomyocytes. In ES cells, Scl mesodermal binding sites were largely devoid of H3K4me1 and H3K27ac; however, in Flk1+mesoderm they had acquired high levels of H3K4me1 and some H3K27ac, which were in part retained during differentiation into cardiac progenitors and cardiomyocytes (Fig2Eand F). Analysis of the average H3K4me1 and H3K27ac levels around Scl binding sites in other mesodermal tissues (limb, fibroblasts) showed no enrichment (Fig2F). This indicates that the regulatory regions to which Scl binds become epigenetically primed for activation specifically in Flk1+mesoderm. We next asked whether Scl is required for depositing active histone marks at hematopoietic and/or cardiac enhancers or whether these enhancers have been epigenetically pre-established prior to Scl binding. ChIP-seq analysis for histone H3K4me1 and H3K27ac in WT andSclNoneFlk1+mesoderm evidenced co-localization of the active marks across all Scl binding sites (Fig2G) including cardiac and hematopoietic genes (Fig2H) in both cell lines. Although H3K27ac levels were generally lower and this mark was not present in all hematopoietic or cardiac enhancers, there was no significant difference in H3K27ac levels at Scl mesodermal binding sites in WT andSclNoneFlk1+mesoderm (Fig2Gand H). These results show that Scl is not required for the establishment of active enhancer marks in mesoderm, suggesting that these enhancers have become primed for activation in multipotent cardiovascular mesoderm to pave the way for Scl action. To investigate whether the epigenetically primed status of enhancers is necessary for Scl binding, we induced Scl expression ectopically inSclNoneiSclES cells and compared Scl binding in these cells to that in Flk1+mesoderm in wild-type andSclNoneiSclcells. While inducible Scl was faithfully bound to the hematopoietic and cardiac enhancers in mesoderm, minimal binding was observed in ES cells (Supplementary Fig S2). Notably, the few binding sites where ectopically expressed Scl was able to bind in ES cells also harbored H3K4me1, whereas the key hematopoietic and cardiac enhancers were devoid of both Scl binding and H3K4me1 (Supplementary Fig S2). These data imply that Scl binding is tightly developmentally controlled, and at least in part determined by epigenetic status of the enhancers. Since Scl is required only during a brief developmental window in midgestation to repress cardiogenesis in hemogenic tissues (Van Handelet al,2012), we assessed whether Scl binding to cardiac enhancers is maintained in hematopoietic cells later in development. Intersecting Scl binding sites in Flk1+mesoderm with previously published Scl binding sites in ES cell-derived hematopoietic progenitor cell line (HPC7) (Wilsonet al,2010) or fetal liver erythroblasts (Kassoufet al,2010) showed that many Scl binding sites are developmental stage specific (Fig3A). GO enrichment analysis revealed enrichment of heart-related terms only with Flk1+mesoderm-specific peaks (Fig3B) and genes (Supplementary Fig S3A). Analysis of Scl ChIP-seq tracks for cardiac regulatorsGata4, Nkx2-5andMyocardinverified Scl binding only in Flk1+mesoderm (Fig3C). To confirm that different methods for ChIP-seq analysis between labs did not account for the difference, we performed Scl ChIP-seq on MEL cells (mouse erythroleukemia line) and verified the absence of Scl binding in cardiac genes (Fig3C,Supplementary Fig S3B). In comparison, Scl binding sites shared between different stages were enriched for hematopoiesis-related terms, and included major hematopoietic transcription factors (e.g. Gata1, Gata2, Lyl1, Gif1b, Runx1andMyb) (Fig3C,Supplementary Fig S3AandB). While Flk1+mesoderm-specific peaks were rarely found within 5 kb of TSS (Fig3D), 46% of the HPC7 or 34% of the erythroid cell-specific peaks were located within 5 kb to TSS. These data suggest that Scl binding extends from distant enhancers to promoters as hematopoiesis progresses. Scl binding to cardiac enhancers occurs transiently in mesodermNoneNoneNoneNoneNoneVenn diagram showing overlaps of Scl binding sites in different developmental stages-Flk1+MES, fetal liver (FL) erythroblast cells (Kassoufet al,2010) and hematopoietic progenitors (HPC7) (Wilsonet al,2010) (left)-shows that majority of Scl binding sites are developmental stage specific. Examples of developmental stage-specific Scl-bound genes are shown (right). GREAT (McLeanet al,2010) analysis of significantly enriched GO terms in Mouse Phenotype category for all common, Flk1+MES-specific, HPC7-specific and FL erythroblast-specific peaks shows enrichment of heart-related terms only among Flk1+MES-specific peaks. ChIP-seq tracks with Scl binding in Flk1+MES, HPC7, FL erythroblasts and MEL (mouse erythroleukemia) cells around cardiac (Gata4,Myocd,Nkx2.5) and hematopoietic (Gata1,Gata2andLyl1) genes show that binding to cardiac genes occurs only in mesoderm, while binding to hematopoietic genes is maintained throughout hematopoietic development. Comparison of the location of developmental stage-specific Scl binding sites relative to TSS shows that Scl binding near TSS occurs more often in later hematopoietic development compared to mesoderm. Heatmaps of combinatorial clustering of H3K4me1 around Scl mesodermal binding sites in MES, HPC7 and MEL reveal two major clusters: Cluster L loses H3K4me1, H3K27ac and Scl binding during hematopoietic differentiation and is enriched for genes involved in heart development; cluster R retains H3K4me1, H3K27ac and Scl binding during hematopoietic differentiation and is enriched for hematopoiesis-related genes. Selected GO terms among top 10 most enriched are shown. Since Scl was no longer bound to cardiac enhancers in hematopoietic cells, we assessed whether the epigenetic landscape in Scl binding sites was modified upon differentiation of mesoderm to hematopoietic cells. Combinatorial clustering of Scl mesodermal binding sites based on H3K4me1 patterns in mesoderm, hematopoietic progenitors (HPC7) and erythroid cells (MEL) revealed two major clusters. Although the majority of Scl binding sites harbored H3K4me1 in mesoderm, this enhancer mark was lost in Scl binding sites in cluster L (= Loss of H3K4me1) but retained in cluster R (= Retention of H3K4me1) as hematopoietic development progressed. The gradual loss of H3K4me1 enrichment from HPC7 to MEL in cluster L strongly correlated with the loss of H3K27ac and Scl binding, while Scl binding sites in cluster R retained H3K4me1, H3K27ac and Scl binding (Fig3E). The peaks in cluster L were enriched for cardiac GO terms and included key cardiac regulatorsGata4, Gata6andMyocardin(Fig3E,Supplementary Fig S3B), while Scl peaks in cluster R were enriched for hematopoietic-related GO terms and included hematopoietic regulatorsGata1, Gata2, Lyl1 andRunx1(Fig3E,Supplementary Fig S3B). The opposite was observed in the cardiomyocyte cell line HL1, in which the enhancers of key hematopoietic regulators lost H3K4me1 and H3K27ac, while the enhancers of regulators of cardiomyocyte differentiation maintained these active marks (Supplementary Fig S3B). These results imply that the epigenetic landscape becomes dynamically remodeled in unused enhancers upon mesodermal fate diversification to blood and heart. We next investigated whether the active epigenetic marks in Scl-regulated cardiac enhancers are replaced by repressive marks in hematopoietic cells to solidify the fate choice. Analysis of Ter119 erythroid cells for several histone marks (ENCODE project and Kowalczyket al,2012) in Scl mesodermal binding sites confirmed a strong correlation between Scl binding and retention of the active histone marks H3K4me1 and H3K27ac in Cluster R, and loss of these marks in Cluster L (Fig4A), also in erythroid cellsin vivo. A candidate for a repression mechanism was Polycomb-mediated deposition of H3K27me3, which has been associated with silencing of both promoters and enhancers (Harmston Lenhard,2013). Moreover, Scl has been shown to interact with Ezh2, a core component of the Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) (Pinelloet al,2014). Analysis of H3K27me3 ChIP-seq data provided no evidence of H3K27me3 acquisition at Scl binding sites in erythroid cells in either Cluster R or L (Fig4A). ChIP-seq tracks around cardiac genesGata4, Gata6andTbx5confirmed the lack of H3K27me3 at Scl binding sites in ES cells, mesoderm and erythroid cells (Fig4B). However, H3K27me3 was observed at the TSS of some Scl-regulated genes (Fig4B). Comparison of H3K27me3 levels in Scl-bound extended activated and extended repressed genes (see Fig1,Supplementary Table S1DandE) in erythroid cells revealed an increase in H3K27me3 at the TSS of repressed genes, while H3K27ac was more enriched at the TSS of activated genes (Fig4C). These data suggested that Polycomb may contribute to the silencing of Scl-regulated genes at promoters, and raised the question whether Scl binding at enhancers is required for bringing PRC2 complex to promoters via chromosomal looping. ChIP-seq analysis for Ezh2 in mesoderm showed strong correlation between Ezh2 binding and H3K27me3 at TSS; however, there was no enrichment of Ezh2 at Scl binding sites (Fig4E). Moreover, there was no difference in the ability to recruit Ezh2 to the TSS of Scl-regulated genes in WT versusSclNoneFlk1+mesoderm (Fig4Dand F). Altogether, these data imply that although Polycomb-mediated repression may contribute to the silencing of cardiac genes in the blood lineage, it is not a major factor governing accessibility to Scl-bound enhancers in mesoderm or their derivatives, and the failure to repress cardiac genes in Scl-deficient mesoderm is not caused by lack of Ezh2 recruitment to these genes. Scl-mediated repression of cardiac genes cannot be explained by Scl-dependent corepressor recruitmentNoneNoneNoneNoneNoneNoneNoneNoneHeatmaps of H3K4me1, H3K27ac, H3K27me3 and H3K9me3 histone modifications in FL erythroblasts around Scl MES binding sites in cluster L and cluster R show no gain of common repressive histone marks in cluster L.H3K27me3 ChIP-seq tracks in ES cells (ESC), Flk1+mesoderm (MES) and FL erythroblasts (Ery) show that cardiac genesGata6,Tbx5andGata4harbor H3K27me3 at the TSS (pink) but not at Scl binding sites (gray). Average H3K27me3 (left) and H3K27ac (right) levels in FL erythroblasts around the TSS of extended list of Scl activated and repressed genes show that Scl repressed genes have on average more H3K27me3 and less H3K27ac as compared to Scl activated genes. Ezh2 ChIP-seq tracks in WT andSclNonemesoderm showing that Ezh2 recruitment to the TSS of cardiac genesGata6,Tbx5andGata4is not Scl dependent. Average Ezh2 enrichment in WT (left) andSclNonemesoderm (right) for inactive enhancers (defined by having H3K4me1 and H3K27me3 modifications (Wamstadet al,2012) and distance greater than 5 kb from TSS) and for Scl binding sites shows no Ezh2 enrichment at Scl binding sites. Average Ezh2 enrichment at the TSS of extended list of Scl activated and repressed genes is similar in WT (left) andSclNonemesoderm (right). Heatmaps of Lsd1 enrichment in ES cells, WT andSclNonemesoderm and in granulocytes (Gr) (Kerenyiet al,2013) in cluster L and cluster R show co-localization of Lsd1 binding with Scl binding sites and reveal that recruitment of Lsd1 can happen independently of Scl. Lsd1 ChIP-seq tracks (ES cells, WT andSclNoneFlk1+mesoderm and granulocytes) and H3K4me1 ChIP-seq track (granulocytes) show that Lsd1 enrichment coincides with Scl MES binding sites nearby cardiac genesGata6andMyocdin WT andSclNoneFlk1+mesoderm. We next assessed whether the repressive histone modification H3K9me3 is acquired at the decommissioned enhancers during hematopoietic differentiation. The average levels of H3K9me3 were slightly higher in cluster L binding sites than in cluster R binding sites in three hematopoietic cell types (Ter119 erythroid cells, Fig4A,Supplementary Fig S4B, and G1E embryonic erythroid cell line and Ch12 B lymphoid cells,Supplementary Fig S4AandB). However, analysis of H3K9me3 around key cardiac genes did not show specific enrichment for H3K9me3 at Scl-bound enhancers (Supplementary Fig S4C). These data imply that although regions around some Scl mesodermal binding sites acquire H3K9me3 during hematopoietic differentiation, deposition of H3K9me3 is unlikely the predominant mechanism that initiates Scl-mediated cardiac repression. As DNA methylation can restrict transcription factor binding to its target DNA (Blattler Farnham,2013), we asked whether changes in DNA methylation mediate the inactivation of Scl-regulated cardiac enhancers in hematopoietic cells. Comparison of the average DNA methylation levels at Scl mesodermal binding sites associated with extended list of Scl activated or repressed genes in genome-wide methylation datasets from mouse ES cells (Habibiet al,2013), bone marrow, heart, pancreas and skin (Honet al,2013), showed that Scl binding sites are on average hypomethylated compared to the surrounding regions (Supplementary Fig S4D). Nevertheless, both Scl's extended activated and repressed target genes showed a general increase in DNA methylation within 200 kb of Scl binding sites from ES cells to all adult cell types analyzed (Supplementary Fig S4E). The methylation levels in Scl extended activated genes were lower in the bone marrow compared to other tissues, while the extended repressed genes showed lower methylation in the heart (Supplementary Fig S4E). To investigate whether Scl initiates differential methylation in mesoderm, we performed RRBS (reduced representation bisulfite sequencing) in ES cells, WT andSclNoneFlk1+mesodermal cells, and MEL cells. Global covariance analysis showed that major changes in DNA methylation occur later in hematopoietic development rather than in mesoderm (Supplementary Fig S4F). Intersection of RRBS data with Scl mesodermal binding sites showed no difference in methylation levels in ES cells and WT andSclNoneFlk1+mesoderm; only MEL cells had higher DNA methylation (Supplementary Fig S4G). Thus, while DNA methylation may contribute to the silencing of Scl target genes in differentiated cells, this occurs later in development and is not centered at Scl-bound enhancers. These data imply that DNA methylation is not a primary mechanism that silences Scl-regulated cardiac enhancers during hematopoietic specification. Our analysis of known repressive histone marks did not provide evidence that Scl-regulated enhancers would be actively silenced during mesodermal lineage diversification, but rather implied that gain and loss of active epigenetic marks is the key determinant that governs tissue-specific access to these enhancers. We thus assessed whether the recruitment of Lsd1, a lysine-specific demethylase 1 that decommissions enhancers by removing H3K4me1 (Whyteet al,2012), to cardiac enhancers is interrupted in the absence of Scl. Comparison of ChIP-seq data of Lsd1 mesodermal binding to published Lsd1 binding datasets in ES cells and myeloid cells (Whyteet al,2012; Kerenyiet al,2013) showed robust co-localization of Lsd1 at Scl-bound enhancers (Fig4Gand H) in both cluster L and R in Flk1+mesoderm, which is a heterogenous population of cells committed to hemato-vascular or cardiac fates. In myeloid cells, cardiac enhancers were devoid of both Lsd1 and H3K4me1 (Fig4H), documenting a short temporal window for Lsd1 action. Nevertheless, analysis of Lsd1 binding in Scl-deficient mesodermal cells did not show evidence of impaired Lsd1 binding in cardiac enhancers in Cluster L (Fig4Gand H). These results imply that, although Lsd1 is likely involved in the decommissioning of unused enhancers upon mesodermal lineage diversification, defective cardiac repression in Scl-deficient mesodermal derivatives is not caused by an inability to recruit Lsd1 to primed cardiac enhancers. As the analysis of repressive marks and corepressors provided no evidence for direct Scl-dependent corepressor recruitment to enhancers or promoters in mesoderm, we considered the possibility that Scl inhibits cardiac fate by interfering with the activation of these genes by cardiac regulators. To identify candidate factors that could also bind to Scl-regulated enhancers, we performed DNA motif enrichment analysis for known transcription factor binding sites in Transfac and Jaspar databases. This analysis identified the composite Tal1(Scl)_Gata motif and Gata motifs as the most prevalent motifs in both activated and repressed genes (Fig5A). A subset of Scl-bound enhancers can be accessed by cardiac transcription factorsNoneNoneNoneNoneNoneNoneA Scl DNA binding motif analysis shows enrichment of Tal1_Gata, Gata and Ets motifs in both Scl activated and repressed genes. B Venn diagram showing overlaps between Scl, Hand1 and Gata4 (Odaet al,2013) binding sites in Flk1+mesoderm documents that some of Scl MES binding sites are also bound by cardiac TFs. C Gata4, Hand1 and Scl ChIP-seq tracks with cardiac and hematopoietic gene regions show examples of three subgroups of enhancers-those bound by Scl, Hand1 and Gata4 (gray), Scl and Gata4 (orange) and those bound only by Scl (blue). D-H Scl binding sites that overlap with both Hand1 and Gata4 (gray) or with Hand1 (green) or Gata 4 (orange) alone show higher evolutionary conservation (D) and higher average enrichment of Scl (E), H3K4me1 (F), H3K27ac (G) and Lsd1 (H) in mesoderm compared to sites bound by Scl alone (blue). I Average expression changes between Scl-expressing and Scl-deficient mesoderm shows that genes that are regulated by enhancers bound by all three (Scl, Hand1 and Gata4) factors or two factors (Scl and Hand1 or Scl and Gata4) show higher absolute expression changes compared to those bound by Scl alone. J Analysis of Scl-regulated key hematopoietic and cardiac genes shows that many of them can be bound also by cardiac factors, Scl, Gata4 and Hand1 (orange); Scl and Hand1 binding (green); Scl and Gata4 binding (orange); and Scl binding alone (blue). There are six known Gata factors, of which Gata1, 2 and 3 act in hematopoietic cells and Gata4, 5 and 6 regulate cardiac development (Chlon Crispino,2012). Gata4 can regulate cardiac development both indirectly via endoderm and directly by binding to cardiac genes in Flk1+mesoderm (Holtzingeret al,2010; Odaet al,2013). Analysis of a published dataset for Gata4 binding in Flk1+mesoderm revealed that Gata4 binding overlaps with a large fraction (41%) of Scl binding sites (Fig5B). Moreover, as other bHLH factors can also bind to E-box motifs similar to Scl, we also performed ChIP-seq for Hand1, a key cardiac bHLH factor that can interact with cardiac Gata factors. 13.2% all Scl-bound enhancers were co-occupied by Scl and Hand1 in Flk1+mesoderm (9.7% Scl, Hand1 and Gata4 altogether, and 3.5% Scl and Hand1 alone). Analysis of the regulatory regions for key cardiac (Gata6, Tbx5andMyocardin) and hematopoietic (Runx1, Gfi1bandGata2) transcription factors identified at least one enhancer in each gene bound by Scl, Hand1 and/or Gata4 (Fig5C). The sites that can be occupied by all three factors (424 sites) included both that remain active (cluster R, 167 sites) and sites that become decommissioned during hematopoietic development (cluster L, 201 sites), and they associated with both Scl-dependent activated (128) and repressed (79) genes. Similar distribution was observed for Scl binding sites that were shared with Gata4 or Hand1 alone. These data suggest that a distinct subset of Scl-bound enhancers may be used by both hematopoietic and cardiac bHLH and Gata transcription factors to activate their own lineage or repress a competing lineage. We next assessed whether there are any unique features that sets the 'dually accessible' enhancers apart from enhancers bound by Scl alone. The enhancers bound by both Scl and Gata4 and/or Hand1 were more evolutionarily conserved as compared to other Scl mesodermal binding sites (Fig5D) and showed higher levels of Scl binding (Fig5E), H3K4me1, H3K27ac (Fig5Fand G) and Lsd1 enrichment (Fig5H). Moreover, Scl target genes that harbor an enhancer that can be bound by Scl and Gata4 and/or Hand1 showed higher average gene expression change in Scl-expressing WT versusSclNoneFlk1+mesoderm as compared to Scl target genes that do not have a dually accessible enhancer (Fig5I). The genes that contain a dually accessible enhancer included many hematopoietic (27/31, 87%) and cardiac (10/15, 67%) transcription factors (Fig5J). We next assessed whether similar developmental stage-specific binding observed with Scl is also seen with Gata4, for which several published datasets from fetal and adult stages are available (Heet al,2014). Analysis of Gata4 binding in different stages of heart development showed gradual loss of overlap between Scl mesodermal binding sites and Gata4 binding from Flk1+mesoderm to E12.5 hearts to adult hearts (Supplementary Fig S5AandB). While Gata4 binding was observed in both hematopoietic (Gfi1b and Myb) and cardiac enhancers (Tbx5 and Gata6) in mesoderm, hematopoietic enhancers had lost Gata4 binding in fetal hearts by E12.5. Many cardiac enhancers also lost Gata4 binding in adult hearts (Supplementary Fig S5C). These data show that the key genes regulating cardiovascular fate determination harbor dually accessible enhancers that can be bound by both hematopoietic and cardiac factors in mesoderm, but are dynamically remodeled during lineage diversification and maturation. Our data propose that this subset of enhancers may be critical for initiating the fate choice between competing cardiovascular lineages. Since Scl and Gata4 share common binding sites in both hematopoietic and cardiac enhancers and Scl acts together with hematopoietic Gata factors 1 and 2 in blood forming cells, we investigated whether hematopoietic Gata factors are required for Scl-induced gene activation and/or repression during mesoderm diversification. ChIP-PCR for Gata2 showed that, similar to Scl, Hand1 and Gata4, Gata2 binds to dually accessible enhancers in both hematopoietic and cardiac transcription factors that are activated or repressed by Scl (Supplementary Fig S5D). To investigate whether hematopoietic Gata factors function in Scl-mediated gene activation and repression, we assessed the developmental potential of Gata1 and 2 double knockout (Gata1 2None) ES cells, which eliminates possible redundancy between Gata1 and 2. No c-Kit+CD41+hematopoietic progenitors were detected in day 7Gata1 2NoneEBs orSclNoneEBs (Fig6A). However, FACS analysis on day 5.25 EBs identified a subpopulation of cells inGata1 2NoneEBs that expressed the early HS/PC marker CD41, whileSclNoneEBs were devoid of this population. Nevertheless, all CD41+cells inGata1 2NoneEBs co-expressed Flk1 and the majority also expressed endothelial markers CD31 and Tie2, raising the hypothesis that HS/PC development becomes stalled at hemogenic endothelium in the absence of Gata1 and 2 (Fig6B). Gata1 and 2 are dispensable for cardiac repression, but essential for the emergence of HS/PCs from hemogenic endotheliumNoneNoneNoneNoneFACS analysis of day 7 EBs with markers CD41 and c-Kit shows efficient generation of HS/PCs from WT, but notSclNoneorGata1 2Nonecells. Average of six independent experiments with SEM is shown. FACS analysis of day 5.25 EBs with markers CD41, Flk1, Tie2 and CD31 shows the generation of hemogenic endothelial cells from WT andGata1 2Nonecells, but notSclNonecells. Average of five independent biological experiments with SEM is shown. Assessment of the developmental potential of day 4.75 EB CD41-CD31+Tie2+endothelial cells on OP9 for 14 days shows the generation of CD45+hematopoietic cells from WT cells but notGata1 2NoneorSclNonecells, and troponin T+cardiomyocytes fromSclNonecells, but not WT orGata1 2Nonecells. Average of four independent experiments with SEM is shown. Heatmaps show gene expression differences in subsets of hematopoietic genes betweenGata1 2Noneand WT orSclNoneday 4.75 CD41-CD31+Tie2+endothelial cells. Cardiac derepression is observed only inSclNonecells. *designates non-functional transcripts. To assess the differentiation potential of Gata1- and 2-deficient endothelial cells, EBs were differentiated for 4.75 days, after which CD41-CD31+Tie2+endothelial cells were sorted and cultured for 14 days in hematopoietic and cardiac conditions on OP9 stroma. NeitherGata1 2NonenorSclNoneendothelial cells generated CD45+hematopoietic cells (Fig6C). In contrast, onlySclNone, but notGata1 2Noneor WT endothelial cells, robustly differentiated into troponin T+cardiomyocytes. These data show that Gata1 and/or 2 is required for hematopoiesis, but not for the repression of cardiogenesis in endothelial precursors. To investigate the effect of Gata1 and 2 on endothelial gene expression, CD41-CD31+Tie2+endothelial cells from day 4.75 EBs were sorted for RNA sequencing. No significant derepression of cardiac regulators was observed inGata1 2Noneendothelial cells, unlikeSclNoneendothelial cells which showed induction of several cardiac genes (Fig6D,Supplementary Table S2). Notably, expression of many hemato-vascular transcription factors that were down-regulated inSclNoneendothelial cells (e.g. Lyl1,Hhex,Cbfa2t3/Eto2,Erg,Fli1,Sox7) was not significantly decreased inGata1 2Noneendothelial cells. Likewise, many surface markers of hemogenic endothelium and HS/PCs (e.g. CD41/Itga2b, VE-cadherin/Cdh5, Esam, Icam2) were expressed inGata1 2Noneendothelial cells, further supporting the notion thatGata1 2Nonecells can specify hemogenic endothelium. However, the expression of key HS/PC transcription factorsRunx1,Myb,Gfi1b,Pu.1/Sfpi1andKlf1was down-regulated inGata1 2Noneendothelial cells (Fig6D), implying that Gata1 and/or 2 is required for the induction of the hematopoietic transcription factor network that enables the emergence of HS/PCs from hemogenic endothelium. To exclude the possibility that Gata3, a hematopoietic Gata factor that functions in T cells (Hosoyaet al,2010) and HSC maintenance (Kuet al,2012) compensates for Gata1 and 2 in cardiac repression, Gata1-, 2- and 3-deficient (Gata1 2NoneGata3None) ES cells were generated using lentiviral knockdown of Gata3. Similar toGata1 2None,Gata1 2NoneGata3Noneendothelial cells showed neither up-regulation of cardiac program nor generation of ectopic cardiomyocytes in culture, and the hematopoietic program was similarly stalled at hemogenic endothelium with intact expression of many Scl-dependent hemato-vascular genes (Hhex,Ets2,Lyl1,Itga2b/CD41,Cadh5/Ve-Cadetc) and defective expression of key HS/PC transcription factors (e.g. Runx1andMyb) (Supplementary Fig S6). Collectively, these data show that hematopoietic Gata factors are critical for full activation of Scl-dependent hematopoietic transcriptional network, but not for cardiac repression. To investigate whether loss of Gata1 and Gata2 compromises Scl binding to its targets during mesoderm specification, we determined genome-wide Scl binding sites in Flk1+mesoderm fromGata1 2NoneEBs using ChIP-seq (Fig7A,Supplementary Table S3). The GO terms enriched among the genes associated with overlapping Scl binding sites included both hematopoiesis and cardiogenesis, while the peaks lost inGata1 2Nonecells were associated with genes related to hematopoiesis (Fig7A). Analysis of the individual genes confirmed intact Scl binding to key cardiac enhancers (Myocardin, Gata4andGata6) in the absence of Gata1 and 2 (Fig7B,Supplementary Fig S7B). Likewise, a majority of hemato-vascular transcription factors (Lyl1, Fli1) that were expressed inGata1 2Noneendothelium retained Scl binding (Fig7C). The subset of genes that lost an Scl binding site inGata1 2NoneFlk1+cells included transcription factorsRunx1, Myb, Pu.1/Sfpi1andGfi1b,whose expression in endothelium was Gata1 and 2 dependent (Fig7D,Supplementary Fig S7B). Remarkably, while several other Scl binding sites were preserved nearRunx1gene, the binding site that was lost inGata1 2Nonecells corresponds to +23 enhancer that has been shown to be essential forRunx1regulation during HSC emergence (Nottinghamet al,2007) and becomes the strongest Scl binding site in HPC7 hematopoietic progenitor cells (Supplementary Fig S3B). These results imply that although Gata1 and 2 are not essential for Scl binding to the majority of its activated or repressed target genes, they are required for the recruitment of Scl to specific regulatory regions that govern the expression of key hematopoietic transcription factors. ChIP-PCR forGata1 2NoneGata3Nonemesoderm confirmed similar binding for Scl in key hematopoietic and cardiac enhancers in the absence of all three hematopoietic Gata factors (Supplementary Fig S7A). Gata1 and/or Gata2 modulates Scl binding in the enhancers of key hematopoietic transcription factorsNoneNoneA Intersection of Scl binding sites in WT andGata1 2NoneFlk1+MES shows Gata1- and/or Gata2-dependent redistribution of Scl binding sites in a subset of target genes (two independent experiments). Selected GO terms among top 10 most enriched for Gata-independent (blue) and Gata-dependent (purple) Scl binding sites together with example genes reveal Gata1- and/or Gata2-dependent functions for Scl-mediated hematopoietic regulation. B-D Scl ChIP-seq tracks in WT andGata1 2NoneFlk1+MES show Gata1- and 2-independent Scl binding to cardiac regulators (Myocardin,Gata4) (B), Gata1- and 2-independent Scl binding to key hemato-vascular regulators (Lyl1, Fli1) (C) and Gata1- and/or 2-dependent Scl binding to key HS/PC transcription factors (Myb, Runx1) (D). We also assessed whether the hematopoietic Gata factors function by modifying the epigenetic landscape to enable access of Scl complex to key hematopoietic enhancers. Analysis of H3K4me1 and H3K27ac in Gata1- and 2-deficient mesodermal cells did not reveal differences in the establishment of primed state in key hematopoietic and cardiac enhancers, including those that could not be activated inGata1 2Nonecells (Supplementary Fig S7B). Likewise, there was a strong correlation of global H3K4me1 and H3K27ac levels between WT andGata1 2NoneFlk1+mesoderm (Supplementary Fig S7C). Collectively, these data show that Scl and hematopoietic Gata factors bind to enhancers that have been epigenetically primed for activation in mesoderm prior to their binding. While the repression of the cardiac fate by Scl can occur in the absence of hematopoietic Gata factors, they help recruit Scl to new regulatory regions to enable activation of key hematopoietic transcription factors that secure the emergence of HS/PCs from hemogenic endothelium. The ability to execute developmental fate decisions with proper temporal and spatial control is critical for embryonic development, as well as for harnessing the power of stem cell and reprogramming technologies for therapeutic applications. The bHLH factor Scl has emerged as a true master regulator of mesoderm fate as it not only governs the establishment of the entire hematopoietic system, but it also is critical for preventing ectopic cardiomyocyte development in hemogenic tissues (Van Handelet al,2012). Here we show that Scl directly binds to enhancers regulating a broad network of hematopoietic and cardiac transcription factors to specify the hematopoietic lineage and override the cardiac fate and thus has a dual function in coordinating the segregation of multipotent cardiovascular mesoderm to downstream cell fates. We discovered that Scl regulates mesodermal fates by binding to enhancers that have been primed for activation specifically in Flk1+mesoderm. A previous study with DNA binding mutant of Scl showed that 80% of Scl peaks in erythroid cells were lost in the mutant and could neither be bound by Scl's interaction partner Gata1, raising the question whether Scl acts as a pioneer factor at these sites (Kassoufet al,2010). Our finding that the establishment of the active histone modifications, H3K4me1 and H3K27ac, at the enhancers of Scl's hematopoietic and cardiac target genes occurs independent of Scl and its complex partners Gata1 and 2 implies that these factors do not act as a pioneer factors but rather exploit pre-established enhancers in mesoderm. These results suggest that yet another factor(s) is responsible for establishing primed enhancers that can attract Scl and Gata factors to their cell type-specific binding sites. Our data are consistent with a model that the acquisition of a primed, or provisionally activated, state at hematopoietic and cardiac enhancers precedes Scl and Gata1 and 2 binding and determines the available fate options in mesoderm. Our finding that overexpression of Scl in ES cells did not lead to Scl binding to hematopoietic or cardiac enhancers also supports this model. Several recent studies have documented highly cell type-specific, functional Scl binding during later stages of hematopoietic development (Calero-Nietoet al,2014; Pimkinet al,2014; Wuet al,2014). Our study documents the dynamic nature of Scl binding already in mesoderm. In contrast to the key hematopoietic enhancers that retained Scl binding and active epigenetic marks throughout hematopoietic development, Scl binding to cardiac enhancers was restricted to Flk1+mesoderm and correlated with the transient presence of active histone marks. These data imply that Scl represses the cardiac fate during a brief window of developmental plasticity before mesodermal fates become solidified, providing a molecular basis for the inducible loss-of-function studies that narrowed down the temporal requirement for Scl function in cardiac repression to mesoderm/early angioblasts (Van Handelet al,2012). Moreover, these data suggest enhancer decommissioning as a key mechanism that extinguishes the cardiac fate option in hematopoietic cells. Our studies propose a model that Scl suppresses cardiogenesis by interfering with the activation of key cardiac genes until the 'window of opportunity' for their activation is closed, rather than directly recruiting corepressors. Analyses correlating Scl binding with major corepressors and repressive epigenetic marks (H3K27me3, H3K9me3 and DNA methylation) did not provide a mechanism by which transient Scl binding to these enhancers results in the repression of cardiac genes, but rather suggests that these repression mechanisms contribute to the overall gene silencing later, once the Scl-driven lineage choice decision has already been made. Lsd1 emerged as a key candidate for modulating enhancer activity during mesoderm diversification as it decommissions cell type-specific enhancers by demethylating H3K4me1 in several developmental contexts including ES cells and myeloid cells (Whyteet al,2012; Kerenyiet al,2013), and interaction of Scl with Lsd1 has been implicated in erythroid progenitors and T-ALL (Huet al,2009a,b; Liet al,2012). Our analysis verified a strong correlation between Lsd1 and Scl binding sites and H3K4me1 in mesoderm. However, Lsd1 binding to cardiac enhancers was not impaired in Scl-deficient cells. Thus, although Lsd1 is involved in decommissioning of unused enhancers during mesoderm diversification, its recruitment to cardiac enhancers is not Scl dependent. These data do not, however, exclude the possibility that the function of Lsd1, or the COREST complex Lsd1 is part of, may be influenced by Scl. As acetylation can impede Lsd1 function (Amenteet al,2013), it is plausible that Scl binding at hematopoietic enhancers reinforces a fully active state, possibly by chromosomal looping to promoter, and thereby indirectly impairs Lsd1 function. On the other hand, Scl binding at cardiac enhancers may interfere with chromosomal looping and/or the establishment of a proper cardiac activation complex, enabling Lsd1 to decommission cardiac enhancers. Future studies are required to directly test these hypotheses. Our findings that there is substantial overlap with Scl and Hand1 and/or Gata4 mesodermal binding sites, and essentially all major hematopoietic and cardiac transcription factors that are regulated by Scl contain at least one enhancer that can also be bound by Hand1 and/or Gata4, support the model that repression of an alternative fate choice may be the result of preventing activation of these genes by competing lineage-specific regulators. The subset of Scl-bound enhancers that can also be bound by Hand1 and/or Gata4 showed higher evolutionary conservation, higher H3K4me1 and H3K27ac enrichment and Lsd1 binding in mesoderm, and stronger correlation with Scl-dependent gene expression change. We propose that these dually accessible enhancers that can be regulated by factors of two opposing lineages act as a platform where the fate choice is determined. Future studies will determine which cardiac factor(s) is most critical for activating these cardiac enhancers and whether they are also critical for suppressing the hematopoietic program. We found that Gata2 can bind together with Scl to both hematopoietic and cardiac enhancers; however, we discovered that hematopoietic Gata factors (1, 2 and 3) are dispensable for Scl-mediated cardiac repression, and only necessary for recruiting Scl to specific binding sites to activate hematopoietic factors required for HS/PC emergence and differentiation (Runx1, Pu.1/Sfpi1, Klf1, Gfi1b). These data suggest that although the core Gata/Scl complex can bind to both activated and repressed genes, Gata/Scl interaction becomes critical principally in gene activation. Similar to hematopoietic Gata factors, Runx1 can redistribute Scl to new binding sites as development progresses from endothelium to HS/PCs (Lichtingeret al,2012). Thus, Scl establishes the blood lineage by binding to a broad set of hematopoietic enhancers; it then induces downstream transcriptional network with the help of its target genes, which enable Scl to relocate to new binding sites to build a functional hematopoietic system. The findings that Scl targets Gata1, Gata2 and Runx1 (Van Handelet al,2012), which are critical for modulating Scl activity in hematopoietic genes, are not essential for cardiac repression underscore the unique role of Scl as a dual regulator of hematopoietic versus cardiac fate choice. Apart from the studies with Scl, ectopic cardiogenesis in hemato-vascular mesoderm has only been observed upon ablation of Etv2, the upstream regulator for Scl (Renet al,2010; Palencia-Desaiet al,2011; Rasmussenet al,2011; Liuet al,2012; Wareinget al,2012). Future studies will be required to determine whether Etv2 has a specific function in silencing cardiac fate or whether it contributes indirectly by inducing Scl expression. Our finding that Scl directs mesoderm diversification via enhancers is concordant with the data that transcription factor binding at enhancers is a key determinant of tissue-specific gene expression (Heintzmanet al,2009; Viselet al,2009; Xuet al,2012). Our discovery that Scl directly binds to enhancers of key transcription factors of two alternative fates suggests a mechanism by which lineage-specific transcription factors secure a mutually exclusive lineage choice by both activating their own lineage and preventing the establishment of alternative fates. Coordination of both processes by the same factor enables accurate fate specification and prevents the generation of a cell with mixed characteristics. As reprogramming of induced pluripotent stem cells is also initiated at enhancers (Soufiet al,2012), understanding the repressive function of master regulators may have broader implications in regenerative medicine as the presence of a factor that could block lineage-specific enhancers during lineage reprogramming may influence the efficiency and outcome of reprogramming. Thus, better understanding of the pre-requisites for gene activation and repression by master regulators, and how the epigenetic boundaries are created between cell types, will help develop more effective protocols for directing cell fates for therapeutic applications. Standard ES cell culture conditions were used to maintainSclNone(Chunget al,2002),SclNone(Porcheret al,1996),SclNoneiScl,WT, Gata1 2NoneandGata1 2NoneGata3NoneES cells. SclNoneiSclcell line was generated by transduction ofSclNoneES cells with rtTA and PNL1-Scl-GFP lentiviral vectors followed by clonal selection. Gata1 2NoneGata3NoneES cells were generated by transducingGata1 2NoneES cells with Gata3 shRNA lentiviral vector (Santa Cruz). Flk1+mesoderm and hemato-vascular derivatives were generated using EB differentiation as described (Mikkolaet al,2003). EBs were digested enzymatically and analyzed by FACS or enriched for desired populations by MACS or FACS sorting. For further details about cell culture, see Supplementary Materials and Methods. RNA preparation, hybridization to Mouse Genome 430 2.0 arrays, and analysis was conducted as described previously (Van Handelet al,2012). Libraries for RNA sequencing were constructed using Encore Complete RNA-Seq DR Multiplex System 1-8 (Nugen). Libraries were sequenced using HIseq-2000 (Illumina). Reads were mapped to mouse genome (mm9) using TopHat v2.0.4 (Trapnellet al,2009). Abundance estimations (FPKMs) were performed with Cufflinks v2.0.1 (Trapnellet al,2010). Assemblies for all samples were merged using Cuffmerge, and differential expression (P less than 0.01) was determined using Cuffdiff. Quantitative reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) was performed with LightCycler 480 SYBR Green I Master (Roche) using LightCycler 480 (Roche). Primer sequences are listed inSupplementary Table S4. For further details, see Supplementary Materials and Methods. ChIP with ES, Flk1+mesodermal (MES), HPC7, MEL or HL1 cells were performed as described previously (Ferrariet al,2012; Kerenyiet al,2013). Libraries were generated using Nugen Ovation ultralow kit and sequenced using HIseq-2000 (Illumina). Mapping was performed using Bowtie (Langmeadet al,2009) as described (Ferrariet al,2012). Peak identification was performed with MACS v1.3.7.1 (Zhanget al,2008). For published ChIP-seq datasets used and more detailed methods, see Supplementary Materials and Methods. RRBS libraries were generated from genomic DNA of mouse ES cells, WT andSclNoneFlk1+mesoderm (MES) and MEL cells as described previously (Meissneret al,2005) with minor modifications. RRBS data were aligned with BS-Seeker2 (Guoet al,2013). Differentially methylated cytosines were calculated with methylKit (Akalinet al,2012). For detailed methods and the published genome-wide methylation datasets used in this study, see Supplementary Materials and Methods. After 4.75 days of EB induction, CD41-CD31+Tie2+cells were sorted from WT, SclNone, SclNoneiScl, Gata1 2NoneandGata1 2NoneGata3NoneEBs and 20,000 cells were plated on irradiated OP9 stroma in 8-well chamber slides (354118 BD FalconTM). 1 mg/ml doxycycline (1:1,000) is added toSclNoneiSclculture and is kept on since day 2 of EB induction. The media contained alpha-MEM, 20% FBS, 1% penicillin, streptomycin and 1% glutamine. For hematopoietic differentiation, 50 ng/ml SCF, 5 ng/ml IL3, 5 ng/ml IL6, 5 ng/ml TPO and 10 ng/ml Flt3L were added. For cardiac differentiation, 5 ng/ml hVEGF, 30 ng/ml mFGF, 50 ng/ml hBMP4 and 1 muM Wnt/Beta-Catenin Inhibitor XAV939 (Sigma) were added. After 14 days, FACS staining or immunostaining was performed as described (Van Handelet al,2012). See Supplementary Materials and Methods for details. Microarray, ChIP-seq, RNA-seq and RRBS datasets have been deposited to the NCBI GEO database under the accession number GSE47085. All datasets used in this study are listed inSupplementary Table S5.