The daphniphyllum alkaloids, a family of natural products numbering more than 200 members,Nonehave attracted considerable attention due to both their diverse biological activities and structural complexities. NoneFor example, in the late 1980s, Heathcock and co-workers proposed an innovative biosynthetic pathway for these alkaloids,Nonewhich led to several elegant biomimetic syntheses. NoneMore recently, impressive total syntheses of (+)-daphmanidin ENoneand daphenyllineNonehave been achieved by Carreira and Li, respectively. The calyciphyllines, isolated from the leaves and stems ofDaphniphyllum calycinum, comprise a subclass that likewise have been the subject of multiple, albeit incomplete, synthetic ventures. NoneParticularly intriguing from the synthetic perspective is (-)-calyciphylline N (1, Figure1), isolated by Kobayashi in 2008,Nonedue not only to the complex architecture, but also to the possibility of developing a unified strategy that would be applicable for the synthesis of related congeners bearing the same DEF ring system. Representative daphniphyllum alkaloids. NoneNotable structural features of the (-)-calcyiphylline N (1) skeleton include six contiguous stereocenters, three of which are bridgehead quaternary and two are vicinal quaternary; the ring A dihydropyrrole; and a DEF decahydrocyclopentazulene domain surrounding a central bicyclo[2.2.2]octane core. Recently, we reported the total synthesis of (-)-calyciphylline N,Nonethe first synthesis of a member of the calyciphylline family. Herein we disclose a full account of this work, a journey that led us through several initial unsuccessful approaches, but in turn revealed a wealth of interesting reactivity and insight for the construction of the daphniphyllum alkaloids. From the retrosynthetic perspective (Figure2), we initially envisioned that the dihydropyrrole ring could be constructed via condensation of a primary amine with the ring B carbonyl, while the stereocenters of the EF ring system would be installed via a critical, late-stage reduction of the alpha,beta-olefin in2. Given the high-risk nature associated with this endgame, we also considered the possibility of forming the C14-C15 bond through displacement of a leaving group at C15 by an ester enolate generated at C14. In turn, an aldol condensation would serve to construct the diene aldehyde, while installation of the secondary hydroxyl group would entail a Tamao-Kumada oxidationNoneof a cyclic siloxane. A central feature of the initial strategy would involve an intramolecular epoxide opening by a vinyl carbanion derived from iodocyclopentenone4, the latter obtained via elaboration of bicyclic ester5, envisaged to be the product of an intramolecular Diels-Alder reaction. NoneTo begin this venture, the requisite triene would be prepared via union of enantiomerically pure homoallylic alcohol6with known silyl acrylate7. NoneRetrosynthetic analysis. As outlined, the synthesis of (-)-calyciphylline N (1) began with the preparation of alcohol6from known homobenzylic alcohol (-)-8(Scheme1),Noneavailable in three steps from commercially availablep-tolylacetic acid (seeSupporting Information). To this end, Birch reductionNoneof (-)-8furnished the expected 1,4-cyclohexadiene (-)-9in 99% yield, which upon treatment with KOt-Bu in DMSONoneled to an inseparable mixture (3.5:1) of alcohols6and (-)-9. Following the method introduced by Sieburth,Noneexposure of7to triflic acid resulted in proto-desilylation to furnishin situthe corresponding silyl triflate with concomitant loss of benzene (Scheme2). Addition of the mixture of alcohols [6and (-)-9] provided triene10for the proposed Diels-Alder cyclization. Thermal cyclization of10proved non-stereoselective, furnishing a complex mixture of all possible diastereomers. Pleasingly, however, use of Et2AlCl smoothly promoted a stereoselective cycloaddition to provide a mixture of only two cycloadducts (9:1) in 50% yield for the two steps. NMR analysis (NOESY) revealed the major product to be the desired diastereomer. The minor diastereomer, unfortunately, could not be isolated as an analytically pure sample for full characterization purposes and was thus tentatively assigned as11(Scheme3). The high diastereoselectivity can be understood by employing a transition-state (TS) model (Scheme3) very similar to that proposed by Roush for acyclic stereocontrol in intramolecular Diels-Alder reactions. NoneGiven the known preference for dienophiles with electron withdrawing substituents to approach the diene pi system in anendofashion,Nonethe possible transition states for the two modes of approach are illustrated (vide supra). Endoapproach of the dienophile from the top face of the diene results in an A1,3-interaction between the indicated vinylic hydrogen and the axial C20 methyl group. This interaction is alleviated when the dienophile approaches from the bottom face of the diene pi system, thus favoring formation of (-)-5. The increased preference forendoaddition under Lewis acid catalysis has been attributed to a lowering of the LUMO energy of the dienophile, as well as redistribution of orbital electron densities. NoneThis results in increased electron density at the carbonyl carbon, leading to greater secondary orbital interactions, which constitutes the basis forendoselectivity in Diels-Alder reactions. Having secured access to intermediate (-)-5, we next explored elaboration of the side chain en route to iodocyclopentenone4. Homologation of (-)-5began with LiAlH4reduction and conversion of the resulting alcohol to the corresponding iodide, thereby providing (-)-12in 80% overall yield (Scheme4). Utilizing a procedure developed by Corey,Nonemetalation of thioanisole withn-BuLi in the presence of DABCO, followed by addition of (-)-12furnished phenyl sulfide (-)-13. We had anticipated that reductive lithiationNoneof (-)-13, followed by addition of vinylogous triflate14, would serve to install the cyclopentenone motif (15). While the reductive lithiation was indeed successful, the resultant alkyllithium underwent an unexpected (and facile) cyclization onto the siloxane, delivering silacyclopentane (-)-16in 70% yield. Unable to avoid this intramolecular siloxane opening, we considered an alternative tactic for side chain elongation (Scheme5), employing an electrophilic, rather than nucleophilic carbon at C11. The method introduced by KozikowskiNonethat relies upon initial conjugate addition of PPh3to cyclopentenone (17), trapping of the enolate with TBSOTf, and generation of the phosphorous ylide that reacts with an aldehyde appeared viable. The resulting silyl dienol ether could then be hydrolyzedin situto the corresponding cyclopentenone. Application of this protocol to our system necessitated the synthesis of the appropriate aldehyde, which was readily achieved by NaCN displacement of iodide (-)-12(Scheme5), followed by DIBAL-H reduction of the resulting nitrile and hydrolysis (91% over two steps). We were pleased to find that subjection of (-)-18to the Kozikowski scenario cleanly furnished (-)-15as a crystalline solid (mp 77-79 degrees C) in 91% yield. Single-crystal X-ray analysis confirmed the relative and absolute stereochemical configurations. Exposure of (-)-15tom-CPBA next furnished the desired epoxide (-)-19as a single diastereomer, which upon exposure to Johnson iodination (I2, pyridine)Nonecompleted construction of (+)-4(Scheme6). Curiously, attempts at performing the iodination and epoxidation in reverse order led to very low yields. Preliminary cyclization studies involving metalation of the vinyl iodide witht-BuLi ori-PrMgCl, however, led only to complex mixtures. To avoid the possibility of side reactions at the cyclopentenone carbonyl, we explored protection. Ketalization proved difficult; the carbonyl was therefore converted to a protected hydroxyl group via Luche reduction (NaBH4, CeCl3.7H2O, MeOH),Nonefollowed by treatment of the resulting alcohol with TBSCl to provide20as a mixture (1:1) of diastereomers in 76% yield for the two steps. Unfortunately, while metalation of20proceeded cleanly, epoxide opening was not observed (Table1). Increasing the temperature of the THF to reflux resulted again in complex mixtures. We also attempted to increase the reactivity of the epoxide by addition of various Lewis acids such as Ti(Oi-Pr)4, ZnCl2, etc. ; the only product observed was that resulting from metal halogen exchange. Other attempts to forge the requisite bond, namely use of strong Lewis acids (e.g., TiCl4, BF3.OEt2) and conversion of the vinyllithium or vinylmagnesium species to the corresponding cuprates also proved unsuccessful. Failure of20to undergo the proposed intramolecular epoxide opening required the development of an alternative strategy for ring D construction. Earlier studies had demonstrated that the siloxane ring could be opened by strong nucleophiles such as alkyl- or aryllithiums. We thus became attracted to the possibility of accessing intermediate22(Scheme7), bearing an iodocyclopentenone moiety, as well as a pendant nucleophile at the opposite terminus of the molecule. Such an intermediate might undergo a Pd-mediated cyclization cascade,Noneultimately delivering lactone23(vide infra). Our plan for22called initially for iodination of (-)-15. The Johnson iodinationNoneprotocol of (-)-15, however, furnished only low yields of (-)-24(ca. 30%), along with substantial decomposition, which made workup and purification difficult. Considering that a substantial throughput of material would be required for the cyclization studies, we developed a more efficient approach based on an extension of the Kozikowski chemistry. NoneBy utilizing 2-iodocyclopentenone (25, rather than17), we anticipated that (-)-24could be obtained directly from aldehyde (-)-18. It would, of course, be necessary to alter the initiating base fromn-BuLi to LDA in order to avoid metal-halogen exchange. This tactic indeed proved successful, providing (-)-24in 90% yield (Scheme8). Luche reduction,Nonefollowed by siloxane ring opening with phenyllithium, then furnished a diol (75% over two steps), which was oxidized with Dess-Martin periodinaneNone(DMP) to yield aldehyde (+)-26. Pinnick oxidationNonethen provided the requisite intermediate, carboxylic acid (+)-22, in 80% yield for the two steps. With ample quantities of (+)-22in hand, we explored the Pd-mediated cascade. Extensive screening of a variety of conditions (bases, solvents, ligands, and sources of Pd0) unfortunately led only to decomposition or proto-dehalogenation. In no cases was the desired lactone23detected. At this juncture, we became convinced that the Pd-mediated strategy would not prove viable. We therefore revisited the epoxide strategy, speculating that if the epoxide could be opened regioselectively, such an event would permit access to the C1 carbonyl in ring B, a potentially valuable functional handle for further elaboration. To this end, NaBH4reduction of (-)-18furnished alcohol (-)-27, which upon treatment withm-CPBA led to epoxide (-)-28as a single diastereomer in 70% yield (Scheme9). Gratifyingly, (-)-28underwent rapid transannular cyclization in the presence of pyridiniump-toluenesulfonate (PPTS). Oxidation of the derived alcohol facilitated purification to provide ketone (+)-29in 67% yield over the two steps. Reductive ring opening with SmI2Nonethen cleanly furnished hydroxy ketone (+)-30in 82% yield. Our ability to install the C1 carbonyl paved the way for the development of a new strategy (Figure3). While the endgame disconnections would remain identical leading to3, construction of ring E would now be delayed to a later stage, employing first a cyclopentenone annulation of31, the latter accessible via intramolecular enolate alkylation of iodoketone32, readily obtained from (+)-30. Revised retrosynthetic analysis. Protection of (+)-30(Scheme10) as the TBS ether was readily achieved with TBSCl/imidazole in DMF. Acylation of the hindered carbonyl in (+)-33, however, proved challenging. Consequently, we employed a two step sequence involving an aldol reaction of (+)-33with acetaldehyde, followed by DMP oxidation of the resulting beta-hydroxy ketone, an effective protocol to access 1,3-diketones introduced by our group in 1981. NoneThis sequence provided diketone (+)-34in 91% yield with greater than 20:1 selectivity. Not surprisingly, attempted allylation of (+)-34utilizing a variety of bases and allylating agents led to complex mixtures of C- and O-allylated products. The Tsuji-Trost protocol,Nonehowever, furnished (-)-35in excellent yield (95%), as a single diastereomer ( greater than 20:1), completing installation of the third and final quaternary center at C8 for (-)-calyciphylline N.Turning to the deprotection of (-)-35, treatment with TBAF furnished none of the desired alcohol36. Instead, the major product proved to be acetate (+)-37(Scheme11). Unexpectedly, the intermediate alkoxide formed upon desilylation had undergone intramolecular attack at the C9 carbonyl, resulting in a retro-mixed Claisen reaction. This result, however, demonstrated that the correct stereochemistry at C8 had been established during the allylation (vide supra). Reasoning that the undesired reaction pathway was initiated by the alkoxide formed upon deprotection, we anticipated that TBS removal under acidic conditions would remedy the problem. Indeed, exposure of (-)-35to a catalytic amount ofp-TsOH in MeOH furnished alcohol (-)-36in 92% yield (Scheme12). Treatment of the latter with I2/PPh3/imidazole then cleanly led to iodoketone (-)-32in 97% yield, which upon treatment with LDA at -20 degrees C pleasingly furnished intermediate (+)-31as a crystalline solid (mp 123-125 degrees C) in 77% yield. The structure and stereochemical configuration were again confirmed by single-crystal X-ray analysis. Interestingly, use of NaHMDS for ring closure led only to the elimination product (-)-38. With ring D secure, we turned to construct ring E. Our strategy called for the use of a Nazarov cyclization. NoneInitially, we attempted addition of an acetylide to (+)-31, followed by a tandem Rupe rearrangementNone/Nazarov cyclization sequence (Scheme13). The C9 carbonyl of (+)-31, however, proved to be completely resistant to nucleophilic attack, even under forcing conditions. Inspection of molecular models suggests that the Burgi-Dunitz trajectory is blocked from the top face of the carbonyl by the C20 methyl group, and from the bottom face due to the concavity of the substrate. We turned instead to a Stille carbonylative cross-couplingNonetactic, followed by Nazarov cyclization. To this end, treatment of (+)-31with KHMDS in the presence of PhN(Tf)2furnished vinyl triflate (+)-40in 98% yield (Scheme14). At the outset of this venture, it was unclear whether the allyl group would interfere with the Pd chemistry at the triflate center. Consequently, we decided to test the reactivity of (+)-40, simply by attempting to exchange the vinyl triflate for a vinyl stannane. Treatment of (+)-40with (Bu3Sn)2, Pd(PPh3)4, and LiCl in fact led only to the intramolecular Heck product (+)-41. NoneThis result is unusual, given that 5-endo-trigcyclizations are typically disfavored. NoneThe alternative 4-exo-trigcyclization, however, would furnish a cyclobutane, a pathway that is likely much higher in energy. Furthermore, Heck reactions proceeding via a 5-endo-trigcyclization have been reported. NoneTo eliminate the Heck reaction pathway, prior functionalization of the allyl group would be required. Thus, hydroboration of (+)-31with 9-BBN and oxidation of the resulting organoborane (NaOH, H2O2)Nonefurnished alcohol (+)-42in 71% yield, which in turn was protected as the TBS ether (Scheme15). Conversion of (+)-43to the corresponding vinyl triflate (+)-44was then achieved under the previously established conditions [KHMDS, PhN(Tf)2]. Subsequent treatment of (+)-44to the standard Stille carbonylation protocol [e.g., CO, Pd(PPh3)4, (CH2CH)4Sn, LiCl] in THF at reflux led only to recovery of starting material. However, upon switching the solvent to DMF and increasing the temperature to 90 degrees C, divinyl ketone (+)-45was cleanly obtained in 72% yield. The SnCl4-promoted Nazarov cyclizationNoneof (+)-45at ambient temperature then proceeded with concomitant removal of the TBS group to furnish (+)-46in 82% overall yield, completing the synthesis of ring E (Scheme16). Construction of ring F next entailed oxidation of (+)-46to aldehyde (+)-47, followed by an aldol condensation employing the conditions reported by Weiss and Carreira in their synthesis of (+)-daphmanidin E (Bn2O2CCF3, PhH, 50 degrees C)Noneto furnish (+)-48, which upon oxidation a la CoreyNoneled to diene ester (+)-49in 85% yield. With (+)-49in hand, the central challenge of the (-)-calyciphylline N synthesis entailed selective reduction of the alpha,beta-olefin of the diene ester. Not surprisingly, this high risk transformation proved difficult. Typical conjugate reduction conditions including Stryker's reagent,Nonethe DIBAL-H/CuI/HMPA protocol,Nonerhodium-catalyzed hydrosilylations, and heterogeneous hydrogenation (Pd/C or PtO2/C) at pressures up to 1000 psi were completely ineffective. Strongly basic conditions (Li/NH3), on the other hand, led to complex mixtures of products. We finally discovered that the Crabtree catalystNoneemploying 400 psi of H2in CH2Cl2cleanly furnished a single new product with the correct mass [(M+H)+= 429] in 79% yield. Analysis of the HMBC and TOCSY NMR, however, revealed the product to be ester (+)-51(Scheme17), in which the reduction was accompanied by olefin isomerization to the C9-C15 position (e.g., HMBC and TOCSY NMR experiments). The stereochemical outcome at C10 and C14, however, was not determined. This result was quite surprising in that isomerization was observed, but hydrogenation to the fully saturated system was not. A plausible mechanism leading to the formation of (+)-51is outlined below (Scheme18). This involves initial coordination of the iridium dihydride complex to the ester moiety of (+)-49. Migratory insertion then delivers a hydride to the alpha-carbon of the diene ester, thereby leading to the indicated allylic iridium species. Delivery of hydride to the alpha, rather than beta-position, may be a consequence of increased steric congestion at the beta-carbon. A typical reductive elimination mechanism would furnish50. In this case, however, we propose a 1,4-reductive elimination pathway that appears to be favored, leading exclusively to (+)-51. Such 1,4-hydrogenations have previously been reported with chromium and ruthenium catalysis,Nonebut not for iridium. Clearly, there is a preference for the olefin to reside at the C9-C15 position over C9-C10. While we attempted to rationalize this outcome by determining the relative thermodynamic stability of (+)-51versus50via computational studies, the results proved to be inconclusive. On the basis of molecular models, we had anticipated that the C1 carbonyl is ideally situated to direct the hydrogenation, both in terms of stereo and chemoselectivity. In fact, it is known that ketones are stronger directing groups than esters in directed hydrogenation. NoneHowever, coordination of the iridium catalyst in this fashion may not be feasible due to a steric interaction with the C20 methyl group (vide supra). We speculated that hydrogenation of a system with an elaborated western hemisphere might prove more rewarding, as opening of the siloxane ring should alleviate this interaction. Guided by this hypothesis, we turned to the Tamao-Kumada oxidation of (+)-31. Siloxane (+)-31, however, was found to be extremely resistant to oxidation (Scheme19). Typical conditions (various fluoride sources, bases, H2O2orm-CPBA)None,Noneled to the recovery of starting material. The strongly basic oxidations of Woerpel for hindered silyl groups (CsOH.H2O or KH,t-BuOOH),Noneon the other hand, only resulted in decomposition, while TBAF treatment furnished desilylated compound (+)-53. NoneUndaunted, we turned to opening the siloxane ring with a strong carbon nucleophile (i.e., phenyllithium), recognizing that phenylsilanes of this type can be converted to highly reactive silyl species under a wide range of electrophilic conditions (Hg2+, Br2, BF3.OEt2, etc. ), which in turn could be oxidized to the corresponding alcohol, employing the Fleming modification of the Tamao-Kumada oxidation. NoneTriflate (+)-44was chosen as the initial substrate, given the lack of functional groups incompatible with phenyllithium. Pleasingly, treatment of (+)-44with PhLi led to phenylsilane (+)-54in 71% yield (Scheme20). Rather than protect the newly generated hydroxyl, we elected to introduce the requisite nitrogen for (-)-calyciphylline N (1) in the form of a robust phthalimide, via a Mitsunobu reaction. NoneRecognizing that the vinyl triflate and TBS group of (+)-55would not survive the strong oxidative conditions of the Fleming-Tamao protocol, we chose to elaborate further this substrate. To this end, Stille carbonylation furnished divinyl ketone (+)-56in 61% yield, which upon employing the Nazarov conditions established for (+)-45(SnCl4, 25 degrees C) proceeded with equal efficiency (82%). The Fleming one-pot oxidation conditions for conversion of phenylsilanes to alcoholsNoneinitially proved problematic, resulting in complex mixtures when applied to (+)-57. However, after considerable screening, we identified HBF4.OEt2in 1,2-dichloroethane (1,2-DCE) at 80 degrees C as an effective protocol to convert the phenylsilane to the corresponding silyl fluoride. Gratifyingly, this highly activated silyl species was readily oxidized to diol (+)-58under the standard Fleming conditions (KF,m-CPBA, DMF). We surmised, however, that the proto-desilylation step would be substantially more facile if an electron-donating substituent were present on the phenyl ring. We therefore set out to prepare the 4-methoxyphenyl analogue of (+)-57. Treatment of (+)-43with 4-MeOPhLi furnished arylsilane (+)-59in 95% yield (Scheme21). Importantly, the hindered carbonyls at C1 and C9 were completely inert to nucleophilic addition by the aryllithium. Mitsunobu reactionNonethen led to phthalimide (+)-60in 99% yield, which was converted to the corresponding vinyl triflate (+)-61in 73% yield by enolization with KHMDS in the presence of PhN(Tf)2. Stille carbonylation next proved highly effective to provide the Nazarov precursor (+)-62in excellent yield. Given that Nazarov cyclizations and proto-desilylations can both be carried out with protic acid,None,Nonewe reasoned that both reactions should be feasible in the same flask. Since earlier studies had demonstrated that HBF4.OEt2would remove the phenyl group [cf. (-)-57], we selected this reagent as the acid promoter. Pleasingly, exposure of (+)-62to HBF4.OEt2at ambient temperature led directly to silyl fluoride (+)-63in 82% yield (Scheme22), wherein the primary TBS group was also removed. Following the Fleming-Tamao oxidation, diol (+)-58was cleanly isolated in 74% yield. Chemoselective protection of the primary hydroxyl was then achieved with TESCl/imidazole to complete construction of alcohol (+)-64in 83% yield. Turning to the required protection of the hindered secondary hydroxyl of (+)-64, difficulties were encountered. Several conditions including BzCl/pyridine and NaH/BnBr resulted in decomposition, while treatment with both silyl chlorides and silyl triflates proved ineffective. Formation of the MOM ether at room temperature also proved sluggish. However, heating (+)-64with MOMBr andi-Pr2NEt in 1,2-DCE to 80 degrees C furnished the protected diol (+)-65in 88% yield (Scheme23). One-pot removal of the TES group and oxidation of the resulting alcohol was next achieved with 2-iodoxybenzoic acid (IBX) in DMSO,Nonethereby providing aldehyde (+)-66in excellent yield. Aldol condensation to furnish (+)-67utilizing the same conditions as described for aldehyde (+)-47then proceeded without incident. Diene aldehyde (+)-67was next advanced to methyl ester (+)-68in 82% yield by employing conditions identical to those described for the preparation of (+)-48(Scheme16). Surprisingly, contrary to diene ester (+)-49, hydrogenation of (+)-68with Crabtree's catalyst at 400 psi of H2led only to the recovery of starting material. A careful review of the literature, however, revealed an important report by Wuestenberg and Pfaltz,Nonedemonstrating that the reactivity of the Crabtree catalyst can be enhanced by replacing the hexafluorophosphate (PF6-) anion with tetrakis[bis(trifluoromethyl)phenyl]borate (BArF-). The more weakly coordinating BArF anion is suggested to permit directing groups such as hydroxyl or carbonyl groups to coordinate more easily with the cationic iridium center. None,NoneSubjection of (+)-68to the Pfaltz-modified Crabtree catalyst [(cod)(Py)(PCy3)]IrBArF under 900 psi of H2furnished a 4:1 mixture of two products with the correct mass [(M+H)+= 562] in 84% yield (Scheme24). After separation of the diastereomers by medium-pressure liquid chromatography, a series of 2D NMR spectra (HMBC, TOCSY, NOESY) were collected for the major diastereomer (Figure4andSupporting Information). Analysis of the NMR data revealed the major product to be the desired diastereomer (-)-69. Looking forward to future synthetic studies, we anticipate that this critical chemo- and stereoselective hydrogenation, possibly directed by the C1 carbonyl, will prove useful in accessing related congeners bearing the same mono-unsaturated DEF ring system. 2D NMR analysis of (-)-69. Because the major product of this reaction bears an olefin at the C9-C10 rather than the C9-C15 position, the implication is that hydrogenation of (+)-68is proceeding via a pathway that is mechanistically distinct from that of (+)-49. We propose that coordination of the iridium catalyst to the C1 carbonyl is now possible due to decreased steric congestion; migratory insertion then leads to the indicated homoallylic iridium species, which is incapable of the 1,4-reductive elimination pathway outlined earlier (Scheme18). Consequently, standard reductive elimination then furnishes (-)-69(Scheme25). Given that iridium insertion to both C14 and C15 would proceed via 6-membered transition states, the observed outcome can be rationalized by considering the electronics of the migratory insertion step. The presence of the electron-withdrawing ester moiety results in greater positive charge at C15, thereby favoring hydride delivery to this center. The C9-C10 olefin resides far within the concavity of the molecule and is thus too sterically hindered to be reduced. Removal of the phthalimide was then readily achieved by treatment of (-)-69with hydrazine at room temperature (Scheme26). The resulting amine pleasingly underwent intramolecular condensation to the imine by heating the ammonium salt (sat. NH4Cl) in EtOH at 70 degrees C,Nonethus providing penultimate intermediate (-)-70in 73% yield over two steps. Removal of the MOM acetal with Ph2BBrNonecompleted construction of (-)-calyciphylline N (1), which displayed spectral and chiroptic properties in excellent agreement to the natural product [i.e.,1H and13C NMR (500 and 125 MHz, respectively), HRMS parent ion identification, and chiroptic properties]. The first total synthesis of a calyciphylline alkaloid, (-)-calyciphylline N (1), has been achieved with a longest linear sequence of 37 steps from known alcohol (-)-8. Highlights of the successful synthesis include a substrate-controlled, intramolecular Diels-Alder reaction to construct the bicyclic core and set four contiguous stereocenters; a highly efficient one-pot Nazarov cyclization/proto-desilylation sequence, which in one flask completes ring E and activates the silicon moiety toward Fleming-Tamao oxidation, demonstrating the use of the 4-methoxyphenyl substituent as a readily introduced and easily replaced aryl group for the activation of otherwise unreactive hindered siloxanes; and finally, exploitation of a subtle structural change permitting chemo- and diastereoselective hydrogenation of an extremely hindered diene ester that installed the C14 and C15 stereogenic centers. In all, the strategies delineated herein should prove useful for the future synthesis of related members of this alkaloid class.