The role of TGF-beta signaling in development of epithelial cancer is complex. In normal epithelial cells, TGF-beta acts as a potent tumor suppressor through regulation of a variety of physiological processes, including growth inhibition and stimulation of apoptosis. NoneSubsequent inactivation of TGF-beta signaling or key target genes can promote thede novodevelopment of epithelial cancer. However, overexpression of TGF-beta in such established cancer cells or the tumor microenvironment is often observed, and appears to play an important role in progression to a more invasive and metastatic phenotype. NoneCanonical TGF-beta signaling is induced by ligand binding to receptor subunit TbetaRII, which in turn activates TbetaRI. TbetaRI phosphorylates SMAD2 and SMAD3, which associate as a heterodimeric complex with the common signaling mediator SMAD4, and together translocate into the nucleus to regulate gene expression. An inhibitor, SMAD7, may compete for binding with SMAD2 and 3 to the activated TGF-beta receptor, thereby suppressing downstream TGF-beta signaling. NoneMalignant cells can circumvent the suppressive effects of TGF-beta through inactivation of key nodes along this pathway. NoneIn human head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC) arising from the upper aerodigestive tract, attenuated expression or genetic alteration of TbetaRII or SMAD4 is common. NoneFurther, knockout of the genes encoding canonical pathway components promotes development of HNSCC in mice. None-NoneThe mechanism(s) contributing to pathogenesis of the remaining cancers with intact TGFbetaRII/I-SMAD activation remains less clear. We recently observed that the TGF-beta-induced growth arrest response is attenuated in the subset of HNSCC cell lines retaining TGF-beta receptor II expression. NoneThese HNSCC exhibited aberrant activation of signal-activated transcription factor Nuclear Factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB) target genes. Similar to the pro-oncogenic role of TGF-beta, activation of NF-kappaB/RELA (p65) is implicated in cell proliferation, survival, malignant progression and poor prognosis of HNSCC, as well as other cancers. NoneWe and others previously showed that NF-kappaB/RELA may be partially inhibited by blockade of autocrine IL-1alpha and TNF-alpha,None,Nonesuggesting that other factor(s), may also contribute to NF-kappaB activation. Interestingly, a TGF-beta activated kinase, TAK1, was previously shown to mediate responses to cytokines TNFalpha or IL-1, and directly phosphorylate the Inhibitor-KappaB Kinase (IKK) complex that promotes activation of NF-kappaB. None-NoneTAK1 activation by TGF-beta and these cytokines involves complex formation with associated linkers. None-NoneIn turn, the IKK complex, formed by IKKalpha and IKKbeta catalytic subunits and a scaffold subunit, IKKgamma/NEMO, phosphorylates Inhibitor-kappaBalpha (IkappaB), which is ubiquitinylated and degraded by the proteasome. NoneIKK-mediated degradation of IkappaB promotes nuclear translocation and DNA binding of NF-kappaB, while IKK phosphorylation of the RELA(p65) subunit is required for transactivation of target genes. None,NoneOf further potential interest, NF-kappaB as well as SMADs 2/3 can upregulate SMAD7, a negative feedback inhibitor of TGF-beta mediated activation of both canonical TGF-beta-SMAD and TGF-beta-TAK1 activation. None-NoneHowever, what role cross-talk and negative feedback between these components of the TGF-beta and NF-kappaB pathways play in altered activation of these pathways in HNSCC and other cancers is not well established. Here, we examined the hypothesis that TGF-beta activation via TAK1 contributes to aberrant NF-kappaB activation in HNSCC. We further explored the effects of TAK1 siRNA and a known TAK1 inhibitor, Celastrol,Noneto inhibit TAK1 mediated NF-kappaB signaling and the malignant phenotype in HNSCC. As NF-kappaB can induce SMAD7, we examined the potential role of NF-kappaB and SMAD7 in the cross-talk between NF-kappaB and TGF-beta pathway, and suppression of TGF-beta induced signaling and gene expression. Our findings support a model whereby TGF-beta-induced TAK1 enhances NF-kappaB activation, while SMAD7 can attenuate canonical and non-canonical TGF-beta signaling, thereby promoting the malignant phenotype of a subset of HNSCC. To examine the prevalence and relationship of TbetaRII expression to canonical TGF-beta-SMAD signaling in HNSCCin situ, we performed immunostaining for TbetaRII, and phosphorylated (activated) SMAD2 and SMAD3 using a tissue array containing 20 human HNSCC specimens in triplicate, and six normal oral mucosa specimens in duplicate, as summarized inFig. 1A. All normal oral mucosal samples exhibited strong (++) TbetaRII and phosphorylated SMAD2 staining. Strong (++) staining for TbetaRII was observed in 47% (28/60) of HNSCC tumor specimens (Fig. 1A, higher magnification,Suppl Fig. 1), and was significantly correlated with staining for activated p-SMAD2 and p-SMAD3 (p=0.0001). Conversely, 53% (32/60) of the tumor specimens showed decreased or absent (+/-) expression of TbetaRII protein, associated with decreased levels of phosphorylated SMAD2 and SMAD3. Together, these observations indicate that expression of TbetaRII and phosphorylation of immediate downstream canonical signaling substrates are related, in subsets of HNSCC tumors. To identify human HNSCC lines that exhibit similar patterns of expression and phosphorylation of TGF-beta signaling components, we compared expression and phosphorylation of TbetaRII and SMADs in primary human oral keratinocytes (HOK) and a panel of nine UM-SCC cell lines (Supplementary Table S1)Noneby Western blot (Fig. 1B). When compared with HOK, expression of TbetaRII was similar or greater in 5/9 (56%; UMSCC1-11B) and attenuated in 4/9 (44%; UMSCC22A-46) lines, as reported previously. NoneExpression of TbetaRII, SMAD2, p-SMAD2, SMAD3, p-SMAD3 and SMAD7 was detectable in HOK and 8/9 of the UM-SCC lines, providing evidence for functional activation of TGF-beta receptor and canonical SMAD signal components. An exception was UM-SCC 46, in which decreased expression of the TGFbetaR2, p-SMAD3 and SMAD7 protein was found to be due to mutation in TbetaRII by sequence analysis (J. Burnett, unpublished data, not shown). As previously shown, HNSCC cell lines appear to be refractory to TGF-beta-mediated growth arrest, which can be attributed in part to defects or attenuated expression of signaling components. None,NoneTo determine the functional responsiveness of canonical TGF-beta-SMAD signaling in HNSCC lines, we compared the effect of TGF-beta1 on SMAD phosphorylation in HOK and three UMSCC lines. In HOK cells, treatment with TGF-beta1 for a short interval of 1h strongly induced phosphorylation of SMAD2 and SMAD3 signal pathway component activation, without significantly modulating total SMAD 2, 3 or 7 proteins (Fig 1B). For UM-SCC 6 and UM-SCC 22B, treatment with TGF-beta1 induced detectable but reduced phosphorylation of SMAD2 (Fig. 1C), and weak induction of TGF-beta-inducible PAI1 reporter gene activity (Fig. 1D, left and middle panels). By contrast, UM-SCC 46, which shows reduced expression of a mutant TbetaRII, treatment with TGF-beta1 neither induced phosphorylation of SMAD2, nor increasedPAI1mRNA, as revealed by Western Blotting and RT-PCR, respectively (Fig 1C and D, right panel, empty vector control). However, if wild-type TbetaRII was reintroduced into UM-SCC 46 cells by transient transfection,PAI1mRNA expression was clearly inducible by TGF-beta1 treatment (Fig. 1D, right panel). The differences in TGF-beta1-induced SMAD phosphorylation andPAI1modulation are consistent with the weak inhibitory effect of TGF-beta on cell proliferation of UMSCC 6 and 22B relative to UMSCC 46, reported previously. NoneNF-kappaB subunit RELA (p65) exhibits aberrant nuclear activation in a major subset of oral premalignant lesions and HNSCC in association with poor prognosis,Nonebut the signal pathway(s) responsible for NF-kappaB activation in HNSCC remain to be fully defined. NoneTGF-beta and TbetaRs can also potentially activate and stabilize expression of TAK1 protein and activate NF-kappaB. None,None-NoneThus, we examined the possible relationship between TbetaRII, TAK1 expression, and phosphorylated RELA (p65) using the HNSCC tissue array. As shown in representative and overall analysis of immunostained tumors (Fig. 2A; higher magnification,Suppl. Fig. 2A), a highly significant correlation between TbetaRII, TAK1 (p=0.0011), and phospho-p65 (p=0.0006) immunostaining intensity was revealed in a subset of HNSCC. Furthermore, the highly significant correlation between staining for TAK1 and phospho-p65 (p=0.0001), indicate that TAK1 might be an important link between TGF-beta and NF-kappaB signaling. Western blot analyses inFig. 2Brevealed that, compared with Heka, most of the 9 HNSCC cell lines expressing TbetaRII inFig. 1Balso show increased basal phosphorylation of TAK1 and NF-kappaB subunit RELA (p65) serine-536 protein when cultured in serum. Conversely, UMSCC46, with the defect in TGFbetaRII, showed relatively weaker p-TAK1 and p-p65, suggesting the possible role of TGF-beta-mediated activation of TAK1 in IKK-dependent NF-kappaB signal phosphorylation. Further supporting this possibility, UM-SCC 6 cells exhibit basal p-TAK1, p-IKK, and p-p65 (Fig. 2B, C), and addition of recombinant TGF-beta1 for various time intervals sequentially induced further phosphorylation of TAK1, IKKalpha/beta, and IKK-dependent p-IkappaBalpha and p-p65 at serine-536 over 2 hours (Fig. 2C, independent experiment,Suppl. Fig. 2B). Functionally, TGF-beta1 also induced a significant increase in NF-kappaB luciferase reporter gene activity in two independent UM-SCC lines by 24 h (Fig. 2D). Taken together, these findings support the hypothesis that TGF-beta is able to activate canonical IKK-NF-kappaB signaling through activation of TAK1. To further establish if TAK1 mediates constitutive, TNFalpha- and TGF-beta-induced TAK1-IKK-NF-kappaB activation, UM-SCC 6 cells were treated with TAK1 siRNA, and cultured for 48h in serum containing medium alone, with added TNF-alpha for final 8h, or with TGF-beta for final 24h (Fig. 3A), based upon optimal effects of TGF-beta upon NF-kappaB-luciferase reporter activity (Fig. 2D). TAK1 siRNA similarly depleted TAK1 expression in UM-SCC 6 cells cultured without or with added TNF-alpha, and less completely with the longer exposure to TGF-beta (Fig. 3A), consistent with TGF-beta-induced stabilization of TAK1 protein. NoneIn untreated, TNFalpha- and TGF-beta-treated cells, TAK1 depletion inhibited phosphorylation of IKKalpha/beta, IkappaBalpha and p65-ser-536 compared to control siRNA. TNFalpha and TGF-beta markedly induced degradation of total IkappaB, and increased cytoplasmic to nuclear translocation of NF-kappaB subunit p65 (Fig. 3A; densitometry,Suppl Fig 3A), even though the TGF-beta-induced increase in p-p65 observed at earlier timepoints (i.e,Fig. 2C;Suppl Fig. 2B), was attenuated by 24h exposure. Conversely, TAK1 siRNA partially inhibited IkappaB degradation and cytoplasmic-nuclear p65 translocation. As only a small increase in resynthesis of IkappaB was detectable with TAK1 depletion in cells continuously exposed to both factors, we transfected a plasmid expressing an IkappaB-luciferase fusion protein which can serve as a quantitative reporter of IKK kinase-induced degradation of IkappaBalpha protein. NoneRelative to IkappaB-luc signal in cells with no treatment, TGF-beta and TNF-alpha treatment induced IkappaB-luc protein degradation (Fig. 3B, left panel). Conversely, knockdown of TAK1 significantly attenuated constitutive, TGF-beta-and TNFalpha-induced degradation of the IkappaBalpha-luc fusion protein (Fig. 3B, left panel). TAK1 siRNA also suppressed constitutive, TNFalpha- and TGF-beta-induced activation of an NF-kappaB specific reporter gene (Fig. 3B, right panel), consistent with inhibitory effects of TAK1 siRNA on p65-ser-536 phosphorylation (Fig. 3A), which is required for NF-kappaB gene transactivation. None,NoneConversely, transient transfection of exogenous TAK1 protein, further enhanced constitutive, TGF-beta1- and TNFalpha-induced NF-kappaB reporter gene transactivation (Suppl Fig 3B). Knockdown of TAK1 also lowered constitutive, TNFalpha- and TGF-beta-induced nuclear NF-kappaB p65 binding activity (Fig. 3C, left panel), and NF-kappaB inducible target gene IL-8, as revealed by RT-PCR (Fig. 3C, right panel). Together, the effects of TAK1 depletion on total IkappaB, nuclear and DNA bound p65 observed were relatively smaller than effects on IKK-dependent phosphorylation of p65 and NF-kappaB reporter gene transactivation, consistent with previous findings that modification of nuclear p65 is most critical for its functional activity. NoneExamination of the effects of TAK1 siRNA knockdown on the malignant phenotype of cells demonstrating TGF-beta and TAK1 signaling in serum-containing medium (Fig, 1B,2B), revealed that TAK1 promotes cell proliferation (Fig. 3D, left panel). As further supplementation of TGF-beta present in serum did not further increase, but slightly inhibited proliferation (Suppl Fig. 3C, upper and lower panels), we examined if the canonical SMAD and TAK1 pathways mediate opposing effects on proliferation in 10% serum -/+ supplemental TGF-beta, by knockdown with TAK1, SMAD2, or both siRNAs. TAK1 siRNA alone inhibited proliferation, while SMAD2 siRNA enhanced proliferation, and combination with TAK1 siRNA inhibited this SMAD2 siRNA-related increase in proliferation in serum alone, or with additional TGF-beta, consistent with residual canonical SMAD inhibitory signaling observed in UMSCC6 cells. We confirmed the efficiency of TAK1 and SMAD2 knockdown by qRT-PCRSuppl. Figure 3D. Similar partial inhibitory effects were observed with anti-TGF-beta antibody attributable to TGF-beta in 10%FBS, and addition of TGF-beta partially overcame the inhibitory effect of anti-TGF-beta antibody and increased proliferation, without further increasing proliferation above that attributable to TGF-beta in 10%FBS. (Suppl. Fig. 3E). Together, these observations support a role for TGF-beta and TAK1 in promoting proliferation and opposing the inhibitory effects of SMAD mediated-canonical signaling. TAK1 depletion also partially inhibited matrigel invasion and migration in wound assay (Fig. 3D, right panel;Suppl Fig. 3F). Thus, these effects of TAK1 depletion are similar to those observed previously with inhibition of NF-kappaB p65 in HNSCC. NoneCelastrol, used as an anti-inflammatory drug in traditional Chinese medicine,Nonehas been shown to inhibit TAK1. NoneWe examined effects of Celastrol treatment on TGF-beta-induced phosphorylation of TAK1 and p65 by Western blot analyses in UM-SCC 6 deficient for wtTP53, and UMSCC 22B with mutant TP53 (Fig. 4A, densitometrySuppl. Fig. 4A). Treatment with 1.0 or 2.5 muM Celastrol for 1 h clearly reduced levels of phosphorylated TAK1 and p65 in both cell lines. Celastrol 2.5muM could also reduce p-TAK1 and p-p65 over 1-2 hours, without reducing total TAK1 (Suppl. Fig. 4B). Furthermore, Celastrol treatment reduced constitutive, TGF-beta1- and TNFalpha-induced NF-kappaB reporter gene activity (Fig. 4B). Further, celastrol significantly inhibited proliferation of both cell lines in a concentration-dependent manner with EC50values ranging from 1.1 to 1.3 muM after 72h incubation (Fig. 4C). We next analyzed whether Celastrol treatment would affect cell cycle distribution or fragmentation of DNA and Annexin V, which are markers of cell death, by flow cytometry. Celastrol at an inhibitory concentration of 2.5 muM induced accumulation in G2/M, sub-G0 DNA fragmentation and Annexin V over 12 to 24 hours in UM-SCC 22B, indicative of growth arrest and apoptotic cell death, respectively (Fig. 4D,Suppl. Fig. 4C). Similar effects were observed for UM-SCC 6 (data not shown). SMAD7 is a downstream target of TGF-beta signaling, that associates with TGF-betaRI and competes with receptor activated SMADS to inhibit their activation, providing a negative feedback mechanism. None,NoneSeveral past studies have reported that SMAD7 may also be induced by or modulate other pathways, including TAK1 and NF-kappaB. None,None,None-NoneTherefore we further hypothesized that SMAD7 might be involved in the cross-talk between TGF-beta and NF-kappaB signaling in HNSCC. To examine the potential relation between SMAD7 and NF-kappaB signaling in HNSCCin situ, we performed immunostaining for SMAD7 and the phosphorylated/activated NF-kappaB subunit p65 using a tissue array (Fig. 5A, higher magnification,Suppl. Fig 5A). Seventy-three percent of the tumor specimens with strong (++) p-p65 staining (22/30) also showed strong (++) expression of SMAD7 protein. Conversely, only 8% of the tumors with weak (+/-) p-p65 expression had strong (++) staining of SMAD7. This correlation between expression of p-p65 and SMAD7 was highly significant (p=0.0007), suggesting that NF-kappaB signaling might contribute to SMAD7 expression. To examine this hypothesis, we first used TAK1 inhibitor Celastrol, which could potentially modulate TAK1-p65-NF-kappaB dependent SMAD7 expression. Treatment of UM-SCC 6 cells with 2.5 muM of Celastrol for 6h abolished phosphorylation/activation of p-65, and inhibited SMAD7 protein levels (Fig. 5B). As Celastrol also inhibited p-SMAD2 (Fig. 2B), and TAK1 has also been implicated in modulating signal SMADs,Nonethese findings suggest that phospho-p65 and/or signal SMADs could modulate SMAD7 expression. To further examine the specific role of p65 in SMAD7 expression, UM-SCC 6 cells were transiently transfected with control or p65 siRNA, which reduced SMAD7 mRNA levels (Fig. 5C, left panel; p less than 0.05), implicating p65 in SMAD7 expression. Depletion of p65 and decreased SMAD7 was also associated with increased expression of canonical TGF-beta-SMAD regulated gene PAI1 (Fig. 5C, right panel). Taken together, these results indicate that p65-NF-kappaB activation may contribute to SMAD7 expression and reciprocal repression of canonical signal SMAD regulated gene PAI1 in HNSCC. SMAD7 has been implicated in inhibition of TAK1 activation and canonical TGFbeta signaling. None,NoneAs we have shown that TGF-beta and NF-kappaB signaling induce SMAD7 expression (Fig. 5B, C;Supplemental Fig. 5B), we explored the effects of SMAD7 modulation on both pathways. UM-SCC 6 cells were transiently transfected with control or SMAD7 vector and treated with 10 ng/ml TGF-beta1 for 24h. Cytoplasmic and nuclear extracts were immunoblotted for TGF-beta signaling components (Fig. 5D; separation controls,Suppl. Fig. 5C). Treatment with TGF-beta1 induced phosphorylation of SMAD2, especially in the nuclear fraction. Furthermore, overexpression of SMAD7 clearly reduced both cytoplasmic and nuclear phosphorylation of SMAD2 in untreated and TGF-beta1 treated cells, indicating an inhibitory effect of SMAD7 on TGF-beta signaling. In addition, SMAD7 overexpression markedly diminished TGF-beta reporter gene activity by 60% in untreated cells and by 75% in TGF-beta1 treated cells, respectively (Fig. 5E, upper panel). While overexpression of SMAD7 also reduced TGF-beta1 induced NF-kappaB reporter gene activity by 64%, it reduced NF-kappaB reporter gene activity by only 20% in untreated cells and 24% in TNFalpha treated cells (Fig. 5E, lower panel). Together, these results indicate that SMAD7 has an inhibitory effect on both TGF-beta-induced SMAD and NF-kappaB signaling, providing a negative feedback mechanism as both pathways induce its expression. However, the inhibitory effect of SMAD7 on TGF-beta-induced SMAD or NF-kappaB signaling is greater than that observed for constitutive or TNFalpha-induced NF-kappaB signaling, providing a basis for preferential activation of NF-kappaB and inhibition of the downstream canonical SMAD pathways. In the present study, we provide evidence for a novel crosstalk between TGF-beta signaling and the NF-kappaB pathway involving TAK1 and SMAD7 in HNSCC (Figure 6). Tissue microarray studies provide evidence linking residual upstream TbetaRII-SMAD signaling with increased TAK1 expression, and NF-kappaB activation, in the same subset of HNSCC tumors. We demonstrate that TGF-beta1 treatment results in sequential phosphorylation of TAK1 and the canonical NF-kappaB pathway comprised of IKKalpha/beta, IkappaB-alpha and p65 in HNSCC lines. TAK1 depletion blocked activation of NF-kappaB, cell proliferation, migration and invasion, implicating TAK1 as a key node in aberrant activation of NF-kappaB and the malignant phenotype of HNSCC. Further studies supported a role for TGFbeta and TAK1 in countering the inhibitory effects of SMAD2 mediated-canonical signaling upon proliferation. Furthermore, we show that NF-kappaB is linked to SMAD7 expression in the same HNSCC subset, and that both TGF-beta and NF-kappaB induce SMAD7 expression, and that SMAD7 preferentially suppresses constitutive and TGF-beta-induced canonical p-SMAD2 signaling and reporter gene activation, relative to effects upon constitutive and TNFalpha-inducible NF-kappaB reporter gene activation. It is well accepted that loss of growth-inhibitory responses to TGF-beta is an important event in early malignant transformation of epithelial cells,Noneincluding most HNSCC. NoneSubsets of epithelial tumor cells escape from TGF-beta-SMAD-dependent effects through defects at different levels of the canonical signal transduction pathway, such as decreased expression of TbetaRII or SMAD4 in HNSCC. None,None,None,NoneHowever, only ~50% of HNSCC tumors (Fig. 1A) and cell lines (UM-SCC 22A, 22B, 38 and 46,Fig. 1B) investigated in this study demonstrated relative reduction in TbetaRII, which may result from repression by mutant TP53Noneor TbetaRII mutation (J. Burnett, unpublished data). TGF-beta1 treatment induced detectable phosphorylation of SMAD2, but attenuated TGF-beta reporter gene activity (Fig. 1C, D) and growth arrest in most of the HNSCC lines examined. NonePreviously, p-SMAD2 was also detected in a majority of HNSCC lines and tumors. NoneHence, mechanisms other than defects in expression and phosphorylation of upstream canonical TbetaR-SMAD components must account for the loss of growth-inhibitory response, and augmentation of the malignant phenotype by TGF-beta in most HNSCC. Along with attenuation of TGF-beta tumor suppressive effects, aberrant nuclear activation of NF-kappaB subunit RELA (p65) is observed in a major subset of early premalignant lesions and associated with risk of malignant progression and decreased prognosis. None,NoneOur results provide evidence that endogenous TbetaRII and TAK1 expression is associated with nuclear NF-kappaB activation in a subset of HNSCC tumors (Fig. 2A). Further, we provide direct evidence that TGF-beta induces NF-kappaB activation through phosphorylation and activation of TAK1 in HNSCC lines. In addition, we have identified TGF-beta-induced TAK1 as an upstream mediator of IKKalpha/beta phosphorylation and activation, leading to phosphorylation and degradation of the NF-kappaB inhibitor IkappaBalpha, and nuclear translocation and transactivation of NF-kappaB. TAK1 was detected in nucleus as well as cytoplasm (Fig. 2A,Suppl Fig 2A), consistent with similar distribution in embryonic epitheliaNoneand with substrate IKKalpha/beta in HNSCC. NonePreviously, TAK1 has been implicated in NF-kappaB activation in response to bacterial lipopolysaccharide, TNFalpha, or IL-1. None,None,NoneHere we show that TAK1 is essential for TGF-beta1- as well as TNFalpha-induced NF-kappaB activation, where ectopic expression of TAK1 kinase inactive mutant attenuated TNFalpha- and IL-1-induced NF-kappaB activation. NoneConversely, we also demonstrate that overexpression of TAK1 augments both TGF-beta1- and TNFalpha- induced NF-kappaB activation, highlighting its importance as a key node in regulation of NF-kappaB in HNSCC. We further investigated the effect of celastrol, known for its ability to inhibit inflammation and TAK1 activation. NoneCelastrol is a quinone methide triterpene extracted from the root bark ofTripterygium wilfordiiHook F, also known as "Thunder of God Vine" and has been used in traditional Chinese medicine for decades. NoneCelastrol is reportedly used for its anti-inflammatory activity for the treatment of asthma, rheumatoid arthritis and neurodegenerative disease. None-NoneOur results indicate that celastrol significantly reduced not only constitutive and TNFalpha-induced but also TGF-beta1-induced NF-kappaB activation. This inhibition was mediated through reduced phosphorylation and activation of TAK1 and phosphorylation of NF-kappaB transactivating subunit p65 (Fig 4). Celastrol has been shown to suppress TNFalpha-induced NF-kappaB activation by inhibition of TAK1 and IKK activation in human myeloid KBM-5 cells. NoneFurthermore, we showed that celastrol reduced cell density in a dose dependent manner, which was likely due to growth arrest and induction of cell death, as indicated by G2/M accumulation, sub-GO DNA fragmentation, and increase in Annexin V by fluorescence flow cytometric analysis. Recently, it was shown that celastrol treatment could significantly inhibit tumor growth in a human prostate tumor xenograft model. NoneAlthough the target effects on NF-kappaB were not defined as in our study, these results indicate that celastrol may hold potential as a therapeutic agent targeting the pro-oncogenic TGF-beta-TAK1-NF-kappaB pathway. Functional crosstalk between TGF-beta and NF-kappaB signaling in tumor cells has been reported in previous studies. On the one hand, TGF-beta was reported to suppress NF-kappaB signaling, through increased activation and expression of IkappaBalpha and retention of NF-kappaB in the cytoplasm in B cells, hepatocytes, and certain breast cancer cell lines. None-NoneConversely, we recently showed that attenuated canonical TGF-beta signaling was nonetheless linked with NF-kappaB activation in another subset of HNSCC. NoneConsistent with our current findings, previous reports have implicated a tumor-promoting effect of TGF-beta in the context of prolonged exposure of cells to high levels of TGF-beta. NoneIn addition, TGF-beta2 functions as a potent activator of NF-kappaB signaling in prostate cancer PC3 cells. NoneTGF-beta1 also induced NF-kappaB, however levels of TGF-beta2 secreted by the prostate cancer PC3 cells were much higher than of TGF-beta1. These findings together with our results showing that TAK1 depletion modulates NF-kappaB and related proliferative, prosurvival, and invasive phenotypes support the hypothesis that TGF-betas may directly contribute to NF-kappaB activation and related processes implicated in tumorigenesis. TGF-beta signaling may act through the conventional SMAD-dependent pathway or via alternative pathways independent of SMADs. Generally, SMAD-dependent TGF-beta signaling has been implicated in tumor suppressing effects (Hahn et al 1996), while SMAD-independent pathways have been correlated with tumor promoting events. NonePrevious studies have revealed that TGF-beta can also activate JNK, Erk and p38 MAPK kinase pathways independent from SMADs. None,None-NoneTGF-beta1 may activate these pathways by signaling via TAK1, through its function as a mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase kinase (MAPKKK). NoneThus, several alternative SMAD-independent TGF-beta pathways besides NF-kappaB demonstrated herein could also contribute to a switch in signal transduction towards the pro-oncogenic activities of TGF-beta signaling observed with cancer progression. Previous studies have suggested an important role of SMAD7 in the interplay between TGF-beta and NF-kappaB signaling. The NF-kappaB subunit p65 may suppress TGF-beta-SMAD signaling through upregulation of SMAD7. NoneConversely, SMAD7 can induce IkappaBalpha expression, thereby inhibiting NF-kappaB activation. NoneOur results suggest a more complex role of SMAD7. We found evidence that the inhibitory effect of SMAD7 on canonical TGF-beta-SMAD signaling is greater than that upon constitutive and TNFalpha-induced TAK1-NF-kappaB signaling previously defined in HNSCC. NoneThis provides a means for preferential inhibition of canonical tumor TGF-beta-SMAD signal mediated tumor suppression, relative to effects on constitutive and TNFalpha-inducible TAK1-IKK-NF-kappaB activation, favoring the malignant phenotype. As celastrol inhibits TAK1-mediated NF-kappaB activation, and promotes apoptosis in HNSCC cells, the alternative TAK1-NF-kappaB pathway could serve as a potential drug target for developing effective therapies to treat HNSCC. The patient characteristics (Supplemental Methods, Table S1), molecular and phenotypic characteristics typical of HNSCC tumors and culture conditions have been described for the panel of genotyped University of Michigan squamous cell carcinoma (UM-SCC) lines kindly provided by Dr. T. E. Carey (University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI). None,None,NonePrimary human oral keratinocytes (HOK; ScienCell Research Laboratories, Carlsbad, CA) or human epidermal keratinocytes (HEKA) used as controls were cultured following the manufacturer's protocol and used within 5 passages. Recombinant Factors and antibodies are described inSupplemental methods. Formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded human HNSCC tissue arrays obtained from Cybrdi were previously described. NoneDetailed immunohistochemistry methods are described inSupplemental Methods. Proteins were separated and immunoblotting were performed using standard methods described insupplemental methodsVectors, siRNAs and Methods used are described inSupplemental Methods. Transfection and reporter assays were done as described previously,Noneand inSupplemental Methods. The TGF-beta-inducible reporter p3TP-Luc plasmid usedNonewhich provides specific readout for TGF-beta-mediated signalingNonewas kindly provided by Dr. Stuart Yuspa (National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD). The IkappaBalpha-luciferase fusion protein serves as an indicator of IKK mediated IkappaBalpha degradation and was kindly provided by Dr. Louis M. Staudt. NoneNF-kappaB DNA binding activity was assessed using TransAM NF-kappaB Family Transcription Factor Assay Kit (Active Motif, Carlsbad, CA) following the manufacturer's protocol as described inSupplemental Methods. RNA isolation and cDNA synthesis and QRT-PCR were performed as previously describedNoneand inSupplemental Methods. Cell proliferation assay with control or TAK1 siRNA, and without and with Celastrol was performed as detailed inSupplemental methods. Scratch migration and matrigel invasion assay with control or TAK1 siRNA were performed as described inSupplemental methods. UM-SCC 6 and 22B cells were plated in 6-well plates and cultured for 24 hours. Media was replaced with celastrol at 2.5 muM concentration. At 12 and 24 hours, cells were harvested, counted, and labeled using the Cycletest Plus DNA Reagent Kit (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA). Samples were run on a FACS Canto machine within 1 hour after labeling, and the data were analyzed using Flow-Jo analysis software (Tree Star, Inc, Ashland, OR). Statistical differences between two groups of data were analyzed using the Student's t-test. The data are presented as mean +/- standard deviation (SD). Immunhistochemistry results were analyzed using Fisher's exact test.