Cortical deposition of amyloid-beta (Abeta) peptide is thought to be a crucial early step in the cascade of events leading to Alzheimer's disease (AD). NoneThe presence of cortical neuritic plaques, consisting of Abeta fibrils surrounded by degenerating neuronal processes, is a hallmark feature for pathologic diagnosis of AD. NoneAbeta plaques have also been identified in individuals meeting clinical criteria for mild cognitive impairment (MCI)Noneand have exhibited subtle relationships with cognition among older individuals without dementia or MCI symptoms. NoneIn addition, pathogenic mutations in genes related to Abeta processing, including the amyloid precursor protein (APP) and presenilin-1 and -2 (PSEN1,PSEN2) genes, have been discovered in patients with the rare, autosomal dominant form of AD. NoneAs a result, Abeta accumulation is increasingly proposed as a major antecedent ultimately leading to incident AD. NoneThe fundamental biological influences on brain Abeta levels are not yet fully understood. The strongest known genetic risk factor for AD is presence of the apolipoprotein E (APOE) epsilon4 allele,Noneandin vitroand murine studies have proposed plausible links between the encoded ApoE E4 isoform and aberrant Abeta mechanisms. NoneHowever,APOEepsilon4 is neither necessary nor sufficient for development of AD pathology, suggesting that the biology underlying Abeta accumulation involves contributions from other genes and pathways, as well as the environment. The ongoing search for genetic modulators of brain Abeta deposition in humans has been bolstered by advances in imaging methods for noninvasive detection of fibrillar Abetain vivo. While existing genetic studies of brain Abeta have focused on candidate genes due to moderate sample sizes, the enhanced stability of recently-developed18F-labeled positron emission tomography (PET) imaging Abeta tracers such as florbetapir (also known as AV-45 or Amyvid) allows for more widespread evaluation to facilitate the acquisition of larger cohorts for analysis. NoneImportantly, florbetapir PET data has demonstrated strong relationships with pathologically-verified assessments of fibrillar Abeta burden,None,Noneand thus represents a novel and robust quantitative phenotype that can be assessed in samples with heightened power for discovery of genes influencing Abeta neuropathology. We used quantitative florbetapir PET data from 555 participants enrolled in the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) to perform the first genome-wide association study (GWAS) of cortical Abeta burden in humans. We hypothesized that GWAS would confirm the association ofAPOEas well as identify other genetic modulators of brain Abeta deposition. This report utilized data from ADNINone(http://adni.loni.ucla.edu/), a multi-site longitudinal study that was launched in 2004 as a public-private partnership. The initial phase (ADNI-1) enrolled individuals aged 55-90 years who were recruited from over 50 sites across the United States and Canada and followed at 6-to 12-month intervals for 2-3 years. These individuals included approximately 200 healthy controls (HC), 400 patients with late MCI (LMCI), and 200 patients clinically diagnosed with probable AD. Subsequent phases (ADNI-GO and ADNI-2) have extended follow-up for existing participants and have enrolled additional individuals, including those meeting criteria for early MCI (EMCI). All participants provided written informed consent and study protocols were approved by each site's institutional review board. Further information about ADNI, including full study protocols, complete inclusion and exclusion criteria, and data collection and availability can be found athttp://www.adni-info.org/. PET imaging using the18F-labeled Abeta tracer florbetapir was performed for participants enrolled in ADNI-GO or ADNI-2. Participants were administered a bolus injection of approximately 370 MBq florbetapir intravenously. Fifty minutes later, a 20-minute continuous cranial PET scan was initiated. Images were reconstructed immediately following the scan using iterative algorithms, and repeat scans were acquired if motion artifact was detected. Preprocessing of the scans was performed as previously described. NoneBriefly, image frames were averaged, aligned to a standard space (AC-PC), resampled to a standard image and voxel size, smoothed to a uniform resolution, and normalized to an atlas-based bilateral and symmetric cerebellar reference region. This cerebellar reference region consisted largely but not exclusively of grey matter and was expected to exhibit nonspecific binding, ultimately resulting in standardized uptake value ratio (SUVR) images. These preprocessed scans were downloaded from the ADNI database (http://adni.loni.ucla.edu/) for 621 participants. For each scan, mean regional SUVR values were extracted for the frontal, parietal, temporal, limbic, and occipital lobes using the MarsBaR toolbox implemented in the Statistical Parametric Mapping 8 (SPM8) software (http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/software/spm8/). The average SUVR for these 5 regions was then calculated to represent a global cortical measure of Abeta deposition to be used as a quantitative phenotype for GWAS. Overall, 19 participants (11 HC, 6 MCI, 2 AD) were excluded due to missing scan data or failed processing, leaving data for 602 individuals available for further analysis. A blood draw for genomic DNA extraction was obtained at the screening or baseline visit for all study participants. NoneGenotyping on these samples was performed according to manufacturer's protocol (Illumina, Inc., San Diego, CA) using the Human610-Quad BeadChip (for subjects initially enrolled during ADNI-1) or the Human OmniExpress BeadChip (for subjects initially enrolled in ADNI-GO or ADNI-2). In addition, the two SNPs characterizingAPOEepsilon2/epsilon3/epsilon4 status (rs429358 and rs7412) were genotyped separately as previously describedNoneand merged with the array data sets. All genotype data underwent stringent quality control proceduresNone(sample exclusion for call rate less than 95% or failed identity or gender check, and SNP exclusion for call rate less than 95%, Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium testp less than 1 * 10-6, or minor allele frequency (MAF) less than 1%) using PLINK (http://pngu.mgh.harvard.edu/~purcell/plink/), version 1.07. NoneIn addition, to limit possible effects of population stratification, multidimensional clustering analysis was used to select only participants with non-Hispanic Caucasian (CEU or TSI) ancestry based on HapMap3 reference populations. Overall, one individual was excluded due to a failed gender check and 42 individuals were excluded based on ancestry. Next, haplotype patterns from the 1000 Genomes Project reference panel were used to impute genotypes for markers not directly assayed. Prior to imputation, the orientation of all genotyped markers in relation to the plus strand alignment of the reference panel genome (NCBI build 37 coordinates) was verified and monomorphic variants from the reference panel were excluded. MinimacNonewas used to impute samples within groups based on the genotyping platform employed (Illumina 610-Quad or OmniExpress). Following imputation, SNPs withrNone less than 0.5 between imputed and assayed genotypes were removed. NoneThe remaining array SNPs demonstrated 99.9% concordance between imputed and assayed genotypes. The independently-imputed data sets were then merged to generate a common set of more than 10 million SNPs for the full ADNI sample. Following quality control (SNP call rate 95%, Hardy-Weinbergp less than 1 * 10-6) and frequency filtering (MAF 5%), 6,108,668 SNPs were included in the GWAS. Of the 602 participants with Abeta PET data, 559 individuals were included in the resulting genetic data set. Among these individuals, four pairs exhibited significant relatedness (PLINK identity by descent PI_HAT 0.5) and therefore one individual from each pair was randomly selected for exclusion (2 HC, 1 EMCI, 1 LMCI), leaving 555 participants for the final GWAS sample. For the GWAS, linear regression was performed using PLINK to determine the association of each SNP to global cortical Abeta levels. An additive genetic model was specified and age, gender, and diagnosis (through a set of binary dummy variables indicating HC, EMCI, LMCI, or AD) were applied as covariates. To account for multiple comparisons, we employed a conservative threshold for genome-wide significant association (p less than 5 * 10-8) based on a Bonferroni correction of one million independent tests. NoneHaploviewNone(http://www.broad.mit.edu/mpg/haploview/) was used to generate Manhattan and Q-Q plots and SNAPNone(http://www.broadinstitute.org/mpg/snap/) was used to obtain regional association plots for selected loci. Post-hoc analyses, including hierarchical linear regression, effect size calculations, and exploratory correlation and interaction studies using Bonferroni corrections for multiple comparisons, were performed using IBM SPSS Statistics for Windows, Version 20.0 (Armonk, NY). This study analyzed data from 555 ADNI participants with non-Hispanic Caucasian ancestry. Participants were diagnosed at the time of the PET scan as HC, EMCI, LMCI, or AD. EMCI subjects met clinical criteria for amnestic MCINonebut exhibited milder (between 1.0 and 1.5 standard deviations below age-associated norms) memory impairment (Table 1). In this sample, the EMCI group was younger than the other groups (p less than 0.001). All groups displayed comparable levels of education but the LMCI group included fewer female participants compared to the HC group (Chi-squarep= 0.029). The GWAS results did not indicate evidence of spurious inflation of association test statistics (lambda = 1.00) due to population stratification or other confounding factors (Figure 1). Loci on two chromosomes exhibited genome-wide significant association (p less than 5 * 10-8) to cortical Abeta levels (Figure 2). As expected, the peak association originated on chromosome 19 from rs429358 (p= 5.45 * 10-14), which codes for theAPOEepsilon4 allele. NoneWhile other SNPs withinAPOEand in the region of its adjacent genesAPOC1,TOMM40, andPVRL2also displayed significant association to cortical Abeta levels in the primary GWAS model (Figure 2andFigure 3A), their association signals disappeared (p greater than 0.05) whenAPOEepsilon4 status (absence = 0, presence = 1) was included as a covariate. Multiple SNPs on chromosome 3 nearBCHE(butyrylcholinesterase) also displayed genome-wide significant association to cortical Abeta load (Figure 2). The peak association signal at this locus originated from rs509208 (p= 2.69 * 10-8), which is approximately 450 kb upstream (5') ofBCHE(Figure 3B). This association remained strong with the inclusion ofAPOEepsilon4 status as a covariate (p= 1.94 * 10-7). Several additional loci exhibited suggestive association (p less than 5 * 10-6) to cortical Abeta levels (Figure 2andSupplementary Table 1). These loci included SNPs within or near the cell adhesion genes ofITGA6(integrin, alpha 6; chromosome 2) andITGA1(integrin, alpha 1; chromosome 5) as well as SNPs near the insulin signaling pathway genePIK3R1(phosphoinositide-3-kinase, regulatory subunit 1; chromosome 5), among others. The association signals at these loci were not reduced after the inclusion ofAPOEepsilon4 allele status as a covariate (data not shown). Following the GWAS, we performed post-hoc analyses to further assess the impact of theAPOEandBCHEloci on Abeta burden. While both theAPOEepsilon4 allele and the minor allele (G) of rs509208 conferred increases in cortical Abeta levels (Figure 4A and 4B), there was no evidence of epistasis modeled as an interaction between these factors (p= 0.871). Instead, these factors appeared to exert independent and additive effects on Abeta burden (Figure 4C), with comparable effect size associated with presence of at least one copy of the minor allele at rs509208 whetherAPOEepsilon4 allele status was included as a covariate (Cohen'sd= 0.50) or not (Cohen'sd= 0.52). Exploratory analyses did not reveal significant interactions (p greater than 0.05) of theAPOEorBCHErisk loci with age, diagnosis, education, or gender. Finally, we performed hierarchical linear regression to assess the variance in Abeta levels uniquely explained by these genetic factors (DeltaRNone). Age, gender, and diagnosis were entered as the first block in the model, and collectively accounted for 2.7% of the variance in cortical Abeta levels in this sample. APOEepsilon4 allele status (+/-) andBCHErs509208 allele status (+/-) were included in the second block for stepwise entry into the model. APOEepsilon4 was found to explain an additional 10.7% of the variance, whileBCHErs509208 accounted for 4.3% of variance over and above that explained by the previously entered variables. Using florbetapir PET and GWAS, this study confirmed the association ofAPOEand identified a novel and independent association ofBCHEto cerebral Abeta deposition. Together, the risk variants at these loci explained 15% of the variation in cortical Abeta levels, a substantial effect for two genes in a study of complex disease of this size. Additional loci, including both new genes and others previously studied in relation to AD, also displayed suggestive association to Abeta burden and provide further targets for follow-up. Florbetapir PET allows for noninvasive detection of brain Abeta plaques,None,Nonea hallmark pathologic feature of AD. It also serves as a quantitative endophenotype that can provide increased statistical power for discovery using GWAS compared to case-control designs. NoneAlthough the heritability of Abeta deposition, a dynamic process captured by PET at one time point, is unknown and not a direct proxy for AD heritability, implicated markers using this approach may be more closely related to underlying processes impacting disease risk and progression. NoneFor late-onset AD, the largest known genetic risk factor is theAPOEepsilon4 allele. Extensive prior studies have suggested a number of mechanistic roles forAPOEepsilon4 on Abeta burden, including hindering clearance of soluble Abeta from the brain,Nonefavoring Abeta aggregation into fibrils,Noneand promoting neurodegeneration by directing toxic Abeta oligomers to synapses. NoneAmong the genes neighboringAPOE, we found no significant associations with Abeta burden after includingAPOEepsilon4 status as a covariate. While this suggests that these genes did not exhibit independent effects on Abeta deposition, the extensive linkage disequilibrium (LD) structure aroundAPOEmakes this difficult to definitively determine. BCHEhas previously been proposed as an AD risk gene. NoneButyrylcholinesterase is known to be enriched within Abeta plaques in post-mortem human AD brains,Noneand its increased presence has been suggested as a critical factor in the formation of the neuritic plaques of dementia. NoneThe most commonly studiedBCHESNP is the K-variant (rs1803274), which is approximately 500 kb downstream of and not in LD with rs509208. TheBCHEK-variant has demonstrated synergistic effects withAPOEepsilon4 on incidence of pathologically-confirmed late-onset ADNoneand on risk of progression from MCI to AD. NoneNevertheless, the present study is the first to implicate genetic variation at theBCHElocus in brain Abeta burden in humans and represents the largest reported effect for this gene on an AD-related phenotype. There are several mechanisms which might explain the effect ofBCHEon Abeta plaque burden. Genetic variation atBCHEhas been associated with increased cortical butyrylcholinesterase activity in autopsy tissue from elderly individuals with dementia. NoneIncreased enzyme activity, leading to decreased acetylcholine levels, may disrupt synaptic functioning, glial cell activation, and myelin maintenance to favor Abeta plaque formation and neurodegeneration. NoneIndeed, cholinesterase inhibitors are presently first-line symptomatic therapies for AD,Noneand drugs such as rivastigmine which inhibit butyrylcholinesterase are suggested to have potential disease-modifying effects in certain individuals compared to exclusive acetylcholinesterase inhibitors. NoneAlternatively, through non-enzymatic functions butyrylcholinesterase may promote Abeta fibrillogenesis from soluble precursorsNoneor may interact with Abeta and ApoE to alter the cerebrospinal fluid environmentNone,Noneand to render developing plaques more resistant to clearance. NoneInterestingly, butyrylcholinesterase activity has been associated with insulin resistance,Noneand rs509208 in particular has been associated in a separate GWAS with diabetes-related traits,Nonesuggesting a broader role of theBCHElocus in disorders characterized by amyloidogenic protein accumulation. Although rs509208 is approximately 450 kb upstream (5') ofBCHEand not within conventional gene boundaries, the next closest genes (ZBBX,SERPINI2) are nearly 1 Mb in the opposite direction (Supplementary Figure 3). Of note, SNPs as far as 800 kb upstream ofBCHEhave previously demonstrated genome-wide significant association with serum butyrylcholinesterase activity in a population sample of nearly 9000 individuals from several Australian twin and family studies. NoneThese SNPs included a peak signal 250 kb from the gene (rs2034445) and other non-independent signals from SNPs in high linkage disequilibrium with rs509208 (e.g., rs6443374 and rs13314077), suggesting that variants upstream of the gene may exert regulatory effects onBCHEexpression with consequences to the activity of its encoded enzyme. Converging evidence in genomics indicates that this kind of regulation is quite common and may involve mechanisms influencing chromatin structure, transcription factor binding, and splicing component recognition sequences, among others. NoneMolecular characterization in brain tissue and cell cultures will be important to determine the complex functional architecture of theBCHElocus and the genes and other DNA elements surrounding it. The current study has several limitations. Although this represents the largest genetic study of Abeta PET, the sample size has limited power for a GWAS. With a larger sample, the suggestive loci we highlighted might have achieved genome-wide significance. Among these includedITGA6which encodes a component of a receptor complex proposed to mediate the pro-inflammatory interaction of microglia with Abeta fibrils,NonePIK3R1which may contribute to disruptions in insulin signaling in the AD brain,Noneand other genes with potential relationships to AD pathogenesis. Similarly, given the novelty of the present Abeta PET GWAS dataset, a comparable replication sample is not yet available. In addition, the ADNI cohort represents a sample typical of a clinical trial for MCI/AD and the analyses here were restricted to non-Hispanic Caucasians. The extent to which the present findings can be generalized to other populations and to the community setting of MCI/AD individuals remains to be determined. Future multi-center and international collaborations are expected to yield larger samples with greater power for analyses of potential interactions of genetic risk factors with each other and with clinical variables such as gender, ethnicity, family history, age of onset, and rate of disease progression, which could not be appropriately addressed with presently available data. Florbetapir also does not bind soluble forms of AbetaNonewhich may exhibit dynamic relationships with deposited, fibrillar Abeta to drive neurodegeneration in AD. NoneFinally, while this study employed imputed (probabilistically-predicted) genotype data to provide deep coverage of the genome, higher-density genotyping arrays and sequencing will eventually provide direct assays for a similar number of variants. Despite these limitations, the present findings point to several intriguing extensions for follow-up. First, GWAS of longitudinal change in florbetapir PET Abeta burden is likely to elucidate additional genes modulating the rate of progression of AD neuropathology. Complementary analytical strategies, including pathway- and epistasis-based approaches, may also reveal functional influences on Abeta deposition that are not easily observed through standard GWAS methodologies. In addition, whole genome sequencing will dramatically enhance the granularity of coverage for GWAS-implicated loci and could be particularly valuable for discovering additional novel loci, rare variants, copy number variants, and DNA regulatory elements. Finally, the approval for widespread use of both florbetapir PET imaging and butyrylcholinesterase inhibitors creates a unique opportunity to prospectively assess the effects of these drugs on Abeta deposition over time, particularly among individuals at early stages in the AD spectrum where clinical efficacy would likely be most valuable. This study highlights the power of pairing targeted molecular imaging with genome-wide analytical strategies to elucidate mechanisms underlying AD pathophysiology. The association of theBCHElocus to Abeta deposition merits further investigation and may have significant implications for risk stratification, biomarker interpretation, and therapeutic development. The initial sample and the number of participants remaining after key data processing steps are displayed (black boxes) along with exclusion criteria at these steps (red boxes). Global cortical Abeta levels are displayed for all GWAS participants stratified by diagnosis (HC, EMCI, LMCI, AD) and byAPOEepsilon4 allele status (top 4 panels) andBCHElocus rs509208 minor allele (G) status (bottom 4 panels). Group means are indicated by red lines. Supplementary Figure 3:Regional association plot (wide view) around rs509208 at theBCHElocusSNPs withinBCHEand the region spanning approximately 1.5 Mb upstream ofBCHEare plotted based on their GWAS -log10p-values (left vertical axis), NCBI build 36 genomic position (horizontal axis), and recombination rates calculated from 1000 Genomes Project reference data (right vertical axis). Genes are labeled with arrows denoting their 5'-to-3' orientation. The color scale ofr2values is used to label SNPs based on their degree of linkage disequilibrium with rs509208. As displayed, rs509208 is 450 kb upstream ofBCHE(blue arrows) and is approximately 1 Mb away from the next closest genes (orange arrows). The association plot was generated using the Locus Zoom software (http://csg.sph.umich.edu/locuszoom). Supplementary Table 1:Peak association signals (p less than 5 * 10-6) from unique genes or intergenic loci in the GWAS of global cortical Abeta load