Warfarin sodium and other vitamin K antagonists adjusted to achieve a target INR of 2-3 can be used to prevent and treat venous thromboembolism (VTE, e.g. pulmonary embolism or deep venous thrombosis), but are associated with the doubling of hemorrhagic risk. NoneThis risk is greatest during the first weeks to months of warfarin therapyNone-Nonewhen the therapeutic dose is generally determined by trial and error. To reduce hemorrhagic risk, experts recommend prescribing a predicted therapeutic dose to patients who are beginning warfarin, rather than use a standard loading dose. None-NoneThe Genetics-InFormatics Trial (GIFT) of Warfarin to Prevent Deep Vein Thrombosis (DVT) compares two algorithms of predicting the optimal warfarin dose-one using both genetic and clinical information, and the other using clinical factors alone. These algorithms are available through a non-profit web based application (www.WarfarinDosing.org) created by some of the authors. This application tailors warfarin doses to individual participants' clinical vs. clinical plus pharmacogenetic profiles. Although there is overwhelming evidence that single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the cytochrome P-450 2C9 (CYP2C9) and vitamin K epoxide reductase complex subunit 1 (VKORC1) genes influence warfarin dose requirements, it is unclear whether prospective pharmacogenetic dosing reduces adverse events. None,NoneCYP2C9 is associated with warfarin inactivation and VKORC1 is associated with the mechanism of action of warfarin. Two multi-centered, randomized trials in progress (EU-PACTNone; COAG NCT00839657) are investigating pharmacogenetic-based warfarin dosing usingVKORC1andCYP2C9. A third gene, cytochrome P-450 4F2 (CYP4F2), has also been associated with warfarin dose requirements. Nonebut its effect on warfarin safety has yet to be evaluated. Small, single-centered trialsNone-Nonehave not detected any reduction in major adverse events from genotyping, but have been underpowered to detect a putative difference. The first aim of GIFT is to evaluate how pharmacogenetic management affects incidence of adverse outcomes. GIFTwill recruit elderly, hip and knee arthroplasty participants receiving warfarin prophylaxis. This population is at high risk for both thrombotic and hemorrhagic events. The rate of symptomatic venous thromboembolism (VTE) after hip or knee replacement surgery is much higher than after almost any other procedureNone, and these rates are highest in the elderly. NoneStudying this high-risk population will therefore powerGIFTto test for a difference in outcomes between pharmacogenetic and clinical warfarin dosing. The second aim ofGIFTis to test the safety and effectiveness of two target INR ranges in arthroplasty participants. The American College of Chest Physicians (ACCP) recommends a target INR of 2.5 while the American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons (AAOS) recommends a target INR less than = 2.0. The AAOS argues that a lower target INR is safer from the standpoint of hemorrhagic risk, and is non-inferior in preventing PE. NoneThese incongruous therapeutic targets have not been directly compared in arthroplasty participants. Prior studies that compared different INR goals in participants with a history of deep vein thrombosis (DVT) provided conflicting results. The randomized trial by Ridkeret alshowed that an INR target of 1.5-2.0 could prevent VTE recurrence without increased risk of major bleeding compared to placebo. NoneIn contrast, Kearonet alfound that an INR of 2-3 was more effective than an INR of 1.5-1.9 in preventing VTE recurrence and equally safe. NoneThe Ridker trial, in conjunction with studies showing that target INR values less than 2.5 are safe and effective in orthopedic participantsNone,None, has led many orthopedic surgeons to target lower INR values. NoneThe best way to clarify this question is to do a multi-centered trial, as proposed here. GIFTplans to enroll 1,600 Medicare beneficiaries undergoing elective total hip or knee replacement surgery at Barnes-Jewish Hospital, Intermountain Healthcare, the Hospital for Special Surgery, and University of Utah Health Care. Research coordinators will recruit and obtain written consent from participants prior to surgery in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. Inclusion and exclusion criteria are listed inTable 1. This high-risk population will be screened 4-6 weeks after surgery for asymptomatic DVT by Doppler ultrasound. Assuming an average rate of DVT of 15%, the trial is powered to answer two novel questions: are pharmacogenetic-based dosing and targeting lower INR safer and more effective approaches to the prevention of VTE than clinically-based warfarin dosing and traditional INR target range? Using a 2 * 2 factorial design, we will randomize participants to each of the following:NoneNonePharmacogenetic vs. clinical dosing of warfarinHigher target INR of 2.5 vs. a lower target INR of 1.8Randomization will be stratified by site, race, and whether participants undergo knee or hip arthroplasty. Lists for block randomization will be prepared in advance by the trial statistician and monitored prospectively. Participants will be randomized after they have been genotyped. Patients and study clinicians will be blinded to patient genotype and study arm, but not to daily warfarin dose. The protocol is to initiate warfarin with similar doses in patients who do or do not have theCYP2C9*2or*3variants. After 2 warfarin doses, subsequent doses are reduced to accommodate the decreased metabolism of S-warfarin conferred by these alleles for affected patients. These initial doses are based on pharmacokinetic principlesNonethat we have prospectively validated. None,NoneThis strategy of prescribing the initial two doses as though all participants wereCYP2C9*1*1, in combination with the substantial contributions of clinical factors on warfarin dose requirements, should prevent inadvertent unblinding of genotype. In contrast to genotype, randomization to standard vs. lower target INR value will not be double-blinded. Technicians performing screening Doppler ultrasounds and physicians adjudicating outcomes will be blinded to trial arm, genotype, and target INR. The research team will be responsible for warfarin dosing for all participants from the time of surgery until the completion of treatment, 4-6 weeks postoperatively. Dosing will be guided bywww.WarfarinDosing.orgfor a minimum of the first 11 days of treatment (Figure 1). Patients whose INR values are therapeutic after day 11 will remain on their predicted maintenance dose; others will have their warfarin dose adjusted empirically. Patients with a target INR of 1.8 will have an INR range of 1.5 to 2.1, whereas those assigned to a target INR of 2.5 will have an INR range of 2.0 to 3.0. Beginning with the INR measured after the first 11 days of warfarin therapy, we will dose patients per standard of care, titrated to their target INR. While prior studies have used pharmacogenetic or clinical dosing protocols for warfarin initiation, GIFT extends the length of the dosing protocol to the first eleven days of therapy. The GIFT algorithms predict stable warfarin doses over days 1-11 of therapy and incorporate clinical, laboratory, and genetic data gathered from sites across North America (including Missouri, New York and Utah), Europe, and Asia. None,None-NoneThe pharmacogenetic models explained 53%-73% of the variability in warfarin dose with median absolute dosing errors of less than = 7 mg/week. To facilitate dosing strategies for GIFT and for the public at large, we have made the non-profit, decision-support web application,www.WarfarinDosing.org, available to the public for investigational use. The website has more than 1000 visitors per week, providing continuous feedback. This extensive testing, feedback, and improvements to the website have produced an accurate, reliable and user-friendly tool critical to support pharmacogenetic study and practice. In March 2011, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) issued an Investigational Device Exemption (IDE) for use ofWarfarinDosing.organd participant recruitment began on March 24th. INR testing will be performed per standard practice-daily for inpatients, bi-weekly for non-therapeutic outpatients, and weekly for therapeutic outpatients. Each day that an INR is available, the GIFT research coordinator will enter it intoWarfarinDosing.orgto obtain a daily estimated dose and an estimated maintenance dose to be used subsequently (until the next INR value). When an INR is not drawn, patients will continue to receive their estimated maintenance dose. The website also indicates whether the dose of warfarin given on the day of INR testing should differ from the estimated therapeutic dose-a feature that allowsWarfarinDosing.orgto compensate for missed doses, large doses, or other dosing errors. In addition to key variables being entered into the study website for randomization and dosing purposes, all study data will be entered into the GIFT database (GIFT DB). Clinical data including the patient's age, race, gender, height, weight, medications, and medical and surgical history will be obtained at the time of recruitment. Blood samples for research purposes will be collected to support genotyping and ancillary studies. DNA will be extracted from de-identified blood samples collected in EDTA tubes to determine subjects' genotypes for CYP2C9 *2 (430C greater than T),*3 (1075A greater than C), CYP4F2 V433M (rs2108622 G greater than A), and VKORC1-1639 G greater than A. Study laboratory technicians will input the genotype results intowww.WarfarinDosing.org. Genotyping for CYP2C9 and VKORC1 will be performed using either the GenMarkDx eSensor genotyping platform or the Simple Probe Warfarin Genotyping Reagents (Idaho Technology Inc), and LightCycler instrumentation (Roche). Genotyping for CYP4F2 will be performed by using either the GenMark eSensor genotyping platform or a melt-curve analysis, with fluorescent resonance energy transfer (FRET) probes, and LightCycler instrumentation (Roche), which was developed by ARUP Laboratories. The Central GIFT Genotyping Laboratory, directed by Dr. Eby, will use Pyrosequencing for verification of all genotypes. The Centers for Medicare Medicare Services (CMS) will reimburse for the genotyping costs using the Coverage with Evidence Development (CED) mechanism, as implemented on April 5, 2010 (http://www.cms.gov/transmittals/downloads/R111NCD.pdf). For blinding purposes, genotyping results will not be available to anyone besides the laboratory technicians. Daily warfarin doses, INR values, and other results will be entered into the GIFT DB along with new medications, the results of Doppler ultrasound testing at post-operative week 4-6 and all adverse events. Adverse events will be consistently reported using an electronic case report formFollowing surgery, participants in the hospital will be monitored daily for adverse events, including VTE (DVT or pulmonary embolism), bleeding, stroke, or myocardial infarction, by members of the clinical research team. If symptomatic VTE has not been objectively documented during the period of warfarin therapy, participants will have a Doppler ultrasound of their legs at the time of warfarin completion (4-6 weeks after surgery). The Biostatistics and Data Management Core will generate reports for the PI and the Data Safety and Monitoring Board (DSMB) regarding rates of adjudicated outcomes. The DSMB will safeguard study participants' safety, assess effectiveness of study procedures, and monitor the overall conduct of the study. The DSMB is comprised of national experts in clinical trials, cardiology, pharmacogenetics, warfarin research, orthopedics, and statistics. The DSMB meets twice annually. The primary outcome for Aim 1 is the composite of VTE, major hemorrhage, INR greater than = 4, or death, and for Aim 2 the composite of nonfatal VTE or death (Table 2). Major hemorrhage includes overt bleeding causing a fall in hemoglobin level of 20 g/L or more, overt bleeding in a critical organ, or bleeding causing patient death. We define minor hemorrhage as bleeding that is neither major nor occult. Primary analyses for both aims will be on an intent-to-treat basis, but we also will report an on-treatment analysis. The secondary outcomes for this study include the percentage of time in therapeutic range (%TTR) during the first 30 days of warfarin for pharmacogenetic vs. clinical dosing and time to supra-therapeutic INR. For Aim 1, we will analyze the primary endpoint in the whole population and in the subpopulation whose clinical and genetic predicted doses differ by greater than = 1.0 mg/day (~50% of the population) using a two-sided chi-square test. To preserve the type I error rate of this co-primary endpoint, we will partition our alpha for the tests in the whole group and the subgroup, as described below. If we recruit 1,600 participants and have an 18% drop-out rate, we will have 1312 participants left for analysis. Using these figures and an overall Type I error rate of 0.05, we have greater than 95% power to detect a difference in the rate of the co-primary composite endpoint. We estimate VTE rates (defined as clinically overt VTE or ultrasound detected VTE at 4-6 weeks) of 18% in participants randomized to clinical dosing and 15% in participants randomized to genetic dosing. Historically, DVT rates with warfarin therapy after joint arthroplasty are variableNone, often with rates around 25%. However, because seminal studies (e.g. None,None) screened for DVT using a more sensitive test, venography, we predict a lower DVT rate in GIFT where participants will be evaluated by Doppler ultrasound. We suspect that the rate of VTE in the subpopulation whose clinical and genetic predicted doses differ by greater than = 1.0 mg/day will be 1.6 times as high as that in the remaining population. This 1.6-fold increase is an estimate based on a 3-fold increased risk of adverse events in participants who carry at least one copy of CYP2C9*2 and/or CYP2C9*3 but no clear increase in patients homozygous for VKORC1-1639 AA. NoneMajor bleeding and death will be uncommon in the trial. In the clinical arm, we anticipate that the rate of major bleeding will be 2.4% and the rate of death will be 1.0%, for a total of 3.4%. In the pharmacogenetic arm, we anticipate the rate of major bleeding or death will be 2.6% (the estimated 32% relative risk reduction in major bleeding is based on a meta-analysis of clinical trialsNoneand a similar reduction in a large observational study). NoneBased on prior research, we estimated the rate of INRs greater than = 4.0 in clinical and pharmacogenetic arms to be 12.3% and 7.4% respectivelyNone. We anticipate that half of the bleeding events will be associated with INRs greater than = 4.0, and account for this correlation in our power calculations. To preserve a Type 1 error rate of 5% for Aim 1, we partitioned the alpha between the whole group and the subgroup analysis, as recommended. NoneThe subgroup consists of participants for whom pharmacogenetic and clinically predicted (per baseline algorithmNone) doses differ by greater than =1.0 mg/day. Due to correlation between outcomes in main study and in the subgroup, Bonferroni splitting would be overly conservative. Partitioning the alpha in this manner maximizes power for Aim 1 while limiting the overall type 1 error rate to 0.05. We elected to partition the alphaa priori, as it maximizes the power for the test in the whole group, without jeopardizing the power in the subgroup. NoneBecause the two endpoints are collinear, we used simulation to determine possible pairs of alpha values that preserved the overall 0.05 type 1 error. We selected our alpha value of 0.044 for the tests in the whole group, 0.01 in the subgroup, and 0.05 for the total alpha. We hypothesize that orthopedic participants randomized to a target INR of 1.8 will have a rate of VTE or death that is no higher (non-inferior) than those treated with a target INR of 2.5. Using the average of our estimates above, we expect the rate of VTE or death with standard warfarin therapy and Doppler US screening to be 16.5%. We will have 80% power to reject the null hypothesis of a difference greater than 5% (the non-inferiority margin) in the two arms. Patients with different target INRs will be combined when comparing clinically versus pharmacogenetically-based dosing, but we will also conduct analyses stratified by target INR values and assess for an interaction. If randomization were to result in an unbalanced distribution of any clinical variable associated with VTE [i.e., age, body mass index, hormonal replacement therapy, or male genderNone], we will adjust for the imbalance using logistic regression. We will compare the time spent in therapeutic range (%TTR) during the first 30 days of warfarin for pharmacogenetic versus clinical dosing in a regression model using linear interpolation of INR values between measurements. NoneWe will compare time to first supra-therapeutic INR (the number of days until INR greater than target INR + 1.5) using the log-rank test or Cox-proportional hazard model, as appropriate. We will censor participants at the time of withdrawal, loss to follow-up, or death. Likewise, we will compare time to the first major or minor bleeding event (safety endpoint). As a secondary outcome, we will rank the components of the composite outcomes in ascending order of importance: INR greater than = 4, asymptomatic DVT, symptomatic DVT, major bleed or PE, death, and analyze with ordinal logistic regression. Recent studies emphasize the importance of certain genetic markers in explaining inter-individual variation in warfarin requirements (Table 3). None-NoneOf particular importance, common SNPs in theCYP2C9gene (CYP2C9*2andCYP2C9*3) are associated with impaired warfarin metabolism, decreased dose requirements and increased time necessary to achieve stable levels of anticoagulation. None,None-NoneFurther, SNPs in vitamin K epoxide reductase complex 1 (VKORC1) correlate with warfarin sensitivity. None-NoneIn recognition of the clinical relevance of these genetic variants, the FDA in 2007, and again in 2010, approved increasingly detailed revisions to the labeling for Coumadin(r), a popular formulation of warfarin, to recommend lower initial doses in participants known to carry certain variants inCYP2C9orVKORC1. NoneAlthough not reflected in drug labeling, recent studies have found that a variant in a third gene (CYP4F2V433M) is associated with higher warfarin maintenance dose requirements. NoneResults from a 2-year randomized trial in Utah suggest that genotype-based dosing did not improve warfarin management as defined by achieving target INR range, though it was associated with fewer thrombotic events. NoneSimilarly, the Medco-Mayo Effectiveness Study showed that warfarin genotyping possibly reduces the risk of hospitalization in outpatients initiating warfarin. NoneIn contrast to these trials, an Israeli randomized trialNonefound that pharmacogenetic testing significantly reduced the rate of minor hemorrhages. Given these conflicting results, clinicians and researchers are uncertain as to whether they should use genetic testing when initiating warfarin therapy. GIFTwill evaluate novel strategies to improve the safety and effectiveness of warfarin therapy and test the safety and effectiveness of different target INR ranges. Although there is evidence of genotypic influence on warfarin requirements, prior studies of pharmacogenetic vs. clinical warfarin dosing have not been sufficiently powered to determine whether pharmacogenetic testing prevents adverse events. The results fromGIFTwill illuminate how pharmacogenetic management affects INR control and clinical outcomes while testing the non-inferiority of a target INR of 1.8 versus a target INR of 2.5. GIFTis complementary to other studies (Table 3) and has several advantages: larger sample size, inclusion of high-risk participants, systematic screening of study participants for clinical outcomes, consistent availability of genotype prior to the first warfarin dose, use ofCYP4F2, and dosing algorithms that guide warfarin dose for at least the initial 11 days of therapy.