Despite improvements in diagnosis and medical treatment, ischemic heart disease remains the leading cause of morbidity and mortality in the United States [1]. Heart failure resulting from myocardial infarction (MI) and reperfusion accounts for over two-thirds of all cases of heart failure in the United States [2]. Strategies designed to preserve functional myocardium after MI, such as reducing myocardial cell death or stimulating angiogenesis [3,4], are therefore crucial for reducing the incidence of heart failure. Although hundreds of experimental interventions have been demonstrated to be cardioprotective in preclinical studies, most of them fail to be translated into clinical practice [5]. Nonetheless, the recent focus on activating the hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) pathway, either by inhibiting HIF-1alpha degradation or by overexpressing HIF-1alpha, in the heart may show promise as a possible therapeutic avenue for treating ischemic heart disease [6,7]. HIF-1 is the principle transcription factor involved in the adaptive response to hypoxia. HIF is a heterodimer comprised of an alpha subunit, which is very unstable under normoxic condition, and a beta subunit. During hypoxia, HIF-1alpha accumulates and forms a heterodimer with HIF-beta to activate over 200 genes, many of which are involved in the regulation of cell survival, anaerobic metabolism and angiogenesis [8]. However, under normoxic condition, HIF-1alpha is hydroxylated resulting in its ubiquitination and subsequent proteasomal degradation [9,10]. A family of Fe+2and 2-oxoglutarate-dependent dioxygenases, termed Prolyl-4 Hydroxylase Domain (PHD) 1-3 proteins, is responsible for the hydroxylation of HIF-1alpha [10,11]. Interestingly, both PHD2 and 3 are highly expressed in the heart [12]. Cardiac-specific knockdown or knockout of PHD2, the major HIF-1alpha prolyl-4 hydroxylase in the heart, increases the myocardium capillary density and protects mice from myocardial injury induced by ischemia or I/R [13-15]. PHD3 has been suggested to play a compensative role in the regulation of HIF-1alpha stability, especially when PHD2 is absent or under ischemic conditions [16,17]. Knocking down the expression of PHD3 significantly increases the capillary density in ischemic hindlimb and improves blood perfusion to the ischemic foot [17]. In addition to its regulatory role in HIF pathway, PHD3 has long been considered a pro-apoptotic protein and regulates apoptosis of a wide variety of cell types in HIF-independent pathways [12,18,19]. Notably, we have recently demonstrated that PHD3 plays an important role in the DNA Damage Response (DDR) and apoptosis induced by DNA damage [20]. However, its role in cardiac function remains unclear. Based on these recent findings, we hypothesize that PHD3 may play a crucial role in cardiomyocyte apoptosis and depletion or inhibition of PHD3 may also be cardioprotective. HL-1 cardiomyocytes (derived from murine atrial cardiomyocytes) were maintained according to previously published methods [21]. Primary neonatal rat or mouse ventricular cardiomyocytes were isolated from 1-2-day-old rats or mice using neonatal cardiomyocyte isolation kit (Worthington-biochem) and maintained in MEM medium supplemented with 10% horse serum, 5% fetal bovine serum, antibiotics (100 U/ml penicillin, 68.6 mol/L streptomycin) and BrdU (100 muM). With this protocol, over 95% of cells remained are cardiomyocytes as determined by staining with MF-20 antibody that reacts with sarcomere myosins. pO2was controlled by incubating cells at 37 degrees C in humidified, O2/CO2-regulated incubator (Coy Laboratory Products) adjusted to 5% CO2and the indicated pO2. After appropriate treatments, cells were washed with PBS and harvested in lysis buffer (1% Triton X-100, 50 mmol/L Tris, pH 7.4, 150 mmol/L NaCl, protease and phosphatase inhibitors). Cell lysates were clarified by centrifugation at 16,000g for 10 minutes. Equal amounts of protein were immunoblotted with corresponding antibodies as described. Freshly isolated hearts were fixed with 10% formalin and embedded in paraffin. Heart sections were mounted on glass slides and then de-paraffinized/hydrated for immunostaining or TUNEL staining. Cultured cells fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde or tissue slides were permeabilized with 0.2% Triton X-100 for 5 minutes at room temperature. After washing in PBS, the cells or slides were sequentially treated with 5% goat serum for 1 hour (for blocking), then with the primary antibodies overnight in the blocking solution. After 3 washes, cells or slides were incubated in the dark with a secondary antibody conjugated to Alexa Fluor 488 (Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR) in blocking solution for 60 minutes at room temperature and then counterstained with DAPI. TUNEL staining was performed following the manufacturer's protocol (S7100, Millipore, MA). Images were taken with fluorescence microscopy or confocal laser scanning microscopy. Caspase 3/7 activity was measured using a Caspase-Glo(r) 3/7 Assay according to the manufacturer's instructions (Promega; Madison, WI). In brief, HL-1 cells were cultured in a 24-well plate. Following transfection of Si-Chk1 or scramble Si-RNA control for 2 days, cells were then treated with 1mM doxorubicin for 8 hours. After treatment, 100 muL of Caspase-Glo(r) 3/7 Reagent was added to each well for luminescence measurement. cDNA was synthesized from 1 mug RNA purified from heart tissues using iScriptTMcDNA synthesis kit (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, US). Gene-specific mRNA levels were measured using the LightCycler(r) 480 Real-Time PCR system (Roche Diagnostic Co.-Roche Applied Science, Indianapolis) with light cycler 480 probe master (Roche Diagnostic Co.) and their specific primers and probes (designed by Roche Universal ProbeLibrary Assay Design Center software athttps://www.roche-applied-science.com/sis/rtpcr/upl/index.jsp?id=UP030000). Samples were analyzed in triplicate with each PCR reaction containing 2mul cDNA (diluted 10-fold), 6.25 mul master mix and 0.375 mul primer-probe. Results are expressed as the ratio of gene of interest corrected to the housekeeping gene mRNA levels and then normalized to wildtype. The primer sequences were: phosphofruktokinase 1 (Pfkl) forward, ATGGATCCCAGCAGCAAG and reverse, CCAGTGTTATAGCCGAACTGC; pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 1 (PDK-1) forward, GTTGAAACGTCCCGTGCT and reverse, GCGTGATATGGGCAATCC; Phosphoglycerate kinase (PGK) forward, TACCTGCTGGCTGGATGG and reverse, CACAGCCTCGGCATATTTCT; BCL2/adenovirus E1B 19-kDa protein-interacting protein 3 (Bnip3) forward, CCTGTCGCAGTTGGGTTC and reverse, GAAGTGCAGTTCTACCCAGGAG; PHD3 forward, CAGGTTATGTTCGCCATGTG and reverse, AGGACCCCTCCGTGTAACTT;Two sets of si-RNA oligos for mouse CHEK1 gene (Gene ID 12649) were ordered from Life Technologies. Catalog numbers are Chek1MSS202946 (UCCAGUAAAUAAUGGUUCCAGUGAA; UUCACUGGAACCAUUAUUUACUGGA) and Chek1MSS202948 (GAUUCUUUACUAAAUUGGAUGCGGA; UCCGCAUCCAAUUUAGUAAAGAAUC). Si-RNA oligos for mouse PHD3 gene (Gene ID, 112407) were purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnoloy (sc-45800). For study of apoptosis induced by hypoxia, HL-1 cardiomyocytes were placed in a 0.5% O2hypoxic glove box (Coy Laboratory) in serum-free media for 48 hours. For studies of signaling transduction induced by hypoxia-reoxygenation, HL-1 cardiomyocytes were placed in a 0.5% O2hypoxic glove box in serum-free media for 6 hours. Cells were then removed from the hypoxic glove box and media were replaced with fresh serum-free media pre-equilibrated in a normoxic incubator. Cells were harvested at times indicated in the figures. For apoptosis induced by hypoxia-reoxygenation, neonatal mouse ventricular cardiomyocytes were transduced with adenoviruses expressing LacZ or Cre recombinase for three days and then placed in an "ischemic buffer" (118 mmol/L NaCl, 24 mmol/L NaHCO3, 1.0 mmol/L NaH2PO4, 2.5 mmol/L CaCl2-2H2O, 1.2 mmol/L MgCl2, 20 mmol/L sodium lactate, 16 mmol/L KCl, and 10 mmol/L 2-deoxyglucose, pH adjusted to 6.2) pre-equilibrated in a 0.5% O2incubator [22]. After 1 hour, reoxygenation was obtained by replacing the ischemic buffer with normal serum-free media pre-equilibrated in a normoxia incubator overnight. PHD3None/None; Cre+/-and PHD3None/None; Cre-/-mice were described previously [20]. Genotypes of these mice were determined by PCR described previously or using the protocol provided by Jackson laboratory [23]. PHD3None/None; Cre+/-at 8~10 weeks old were intraperitoneally injected with tamoxifen (50 mg/kg/day) for five consecutive days to generate PHD3-/-mice [24]. Depletion of PHD3 in hearts was confirmed by real-time PCR or Western-blot one week after the first injection of tamoxifen, using primers described previously [23]. Littermate PHD3None/None; Cre-/-mice injected with tamoxifen were used as the controls. All animal protocols were reviewed and approved by the Institutional Animal Care Advisory Committee and were in compliance with the rules governing animal use as published by the National Institutes of Health. Left anterior descending (LAD) coronary arteries of mice with indicated genotypes were tied for 40 minutes, followed by 1 or 3 days of reperfusion. Briefly, male mice (8-10 weeks old) were anesthetized with pentobarbital (45 mg/kg), intubated, and placed on a ventilator. The chest cavity was opened by an incision of the left fourth intercostal space, and the pericardial sac was removed to visualize the LAD coronary artery. A 7-0 silk suture was passed underneath the LAD artery ~1 to 2 mm below the left auricle and tied around a 1-mm length of polyethylene tubing (OD = 0.61 mm; Intramedic PE-10, Clay Adams, Parsippany, NJ) to produce myocardial blanching. After 40 minutes, blood flow was restored and the chest wall was then closed. Three days after reperfusion, the hearts were stained with Evan's Blue to demarcate the area at risk (AAR) and with 2% triphenyl tetrazolium chloride (TTC) to identify infarcted area (IA). The area of IA and AAR were quantified using ImageJ (National Institutes of Health). For apoptosis analysis, 4 hearts from PHD3None/None; Cre-/-and 6 hearts from PHD3None/None; Cre+/-mice were fixed with 10% formalin and embedded with paraffin one day after reperfusion. Three sections from each heart were used for TUNEL staining. TUNEL positive cells from five views of each section in the area at risk were counted in a blinded manner. Data are presented as mean +/- SEM. Differences between groups were evaluated for statistical significance using Student'st-test. Pvalues less than 0.05 were regarded as significant. To examine whether depletion of PHD3 is cardioprotective, we generated PHD3None/None; Cre+/-mice, which utilize a tamoxifen-inducible and Cre-mediated recombination system [20]. Depletion of PHD3 in the heart was obtained by intraperitoneal infusion of tamoxifen (50mg/kg/day) for five consecutive days. One week after the first injection of tamoxifen, myocardial injury was induced in PHD3None/None; Cre+/-mice and the littermate controls (PHD3None/None; Cre-/-mice) by subjecting them to ischemia for 40 minutes followed by reperfusion for 72 hours using a reversible ligation of the left anterior descending artery (LAD). Interestingly, although there were no gross abnormities observed in the hearts from PHD3None/None; Cre+/-mice, the infarct area (IA) normalized by area at risk (AAR) in PHD3None/None; Cre+/-mice was significantly smaller than that in the littermate controls (Figure 1A and B), suggesting that depletion of PHD3 protected hearts from ischemia-reperfusion (I/R) injury. In consistent with the pro-apoptotic role of PHD3 described in other cells [18-20], TUNEL staining revealed that cardiomyocyte apoptosis in the area of risk was also significantly decreased in PHD3None/None; Cre+/-mice at 24 hours after reperfusion (Figure 2). Taken together, these results suggest that depletion of PHD3 may protect mice from ischemia-reperfusion injury by decreasing cardiomyocyte apoptosis. It is well documented that PHD2 is the major HIF-1alpha prolyl-4 hydroxylase in the heart and depletion of PHD3 alone has no effect on cardiac HIF-1alpha protein levels [15,16]. Consistently, we didn't observe any significant accumulation of HIF-1alpha protein in the hearts from PHD3None/None; Cre+/-mice (Figure 3A). In addition, real-time PCR analysis demonstrated that there were no significant changes in the expression of some HIF target genes in the hearts of PHD3None/None; Cre+/-mice either (Figure 3B), suggesting that HIF pathway is not further activated at physiological condition in PHD3None/None; Cre+/-mice compared to PHD3None/None; Cre-/-mice. As shown infigure 3A and B, we could barely detect both PHD3 protein and mRNA in the hearts of PHD3None/None; Cre+/-mice, suggesting the successful deletion of PHD3 in the hearts. It was reported that knockdown of PHD2 increased the myocardium capillary density via HIF-1 pathway, which plays an important role in cardioprotection [13,14]. Since we have not observed any significant activation of HIF-1 pathway in the heart of PHD3None/Nonenull mice, we expect that depletion of PHD3 will not change the myocardium capillary density. To confirm this hypothesis, we analyzed the myocardium capillary density of PHD3None/None; Cre+/-or PHD3None/None; Cre-/-mice by immunostaining heart sections with anti-myosin and anti-E-lectin antibodies. As expected, we observed no significant difference in the myocardium capillary density between PHD3None/None; Cre+/-and PHD3None/None; Cre-/-mice (Figure 3C and D). Taken together, these results suggest that depletion of PHD3 has no effect on HIF-1 pathway and myocardium capillary density at physiological condition. However, it has been reported that PHD3 itself is a HIF-1 target and can be induced by hypoxia, which may serve as a form of negative feedback mechanism to regulate HIF-1alpha stability at hypoxic condition [10,25]. Consistently, we demonstrated that activation of HIF-1 pathway by either prolyl hydroxylase inhibitor dimethyloxaloylglycine (DMOG) or hypoxia increased the expression of PHD3 (Figure 3Aand4A). More importantly, depletion of PHD3 in neonatal mouse ventricular cardiomyocytes further increased HIF-1alpha protein level at hypoxic condition (Figure 4A), suggesting that PHD3 can regulate HIF-1alpha stability at hypoxic condition. It is well documented that activation of the HIF-1 pathway can turn on a large number of genes, which are involved in the regulation of cell survival and metabolic reprogramming to fight against hypoxia-induced damage [8]. Increased expression of HIF-1alpha has also been shown to inhibit apoptosis in a variety of cell types [26,27]. Therefore, we hypothesized that increased expression of HIF-1alpha may also protect cardiomyocyte from apoptosis induced by hypoxia. To examine this hypothesis, we overexpressed a normoxia-stable HIF-1alpha mutant, in which two proline residues at position 402 and 564 are replaced with Ala and Gly respectively [27], in HL-1 cells and then cultured them under hypoxic condition for 48 hours to induce apoptosis. Not surprisingly, we demonstrated that overexpression of HIF-1alphaPP/AGsignificantly decreased the apoptosis of HL-1 cells cultured at hypoxic condition (Figure 4B and C). Taken together, we demonstrated that depletion of PHD3 further increased the protein level of HIF-1alpha at hypoxic condition and increased expression of HIF-1alpha protected cardiomyocytes from hypoxia-induced apoptosis. It is generally accepted that oxidative stress plays a critical role in cardiomyocyte apoptosis induced by I/R injury [28]. Reactive oxygen species (ROS) induced by hypoxia-reoxygenation induces DNA damage and activates the DNA damage response (DDR) in human cancer cells and primary lymphocytes [29,30]. However, whether oxidative stress induced by hypoxia/re-oxygenation also activates the DDR in cardiomyocytes, and how this might be mediated, is largely unclear. Interestingly, we have recently demonstrated that inhibition or depletion of PHD3 inhibits ATR/Chk1/p53 pathway and apoptosis induced by a wide variety of DNA damage agents, both in vitro and in vivo [20]. It is very interesting to examine whether PHD3 regulates the DDR and apoptosis induced by oxidative stress in cardiomyocytes. Doxorubicin, a potent chemotherapy agent, causes cardiomyocyte apoptosis and cardiomyopathy[31]. It was demonstrated recently that oxidative DNA damage and subsequent activation of the DDR induced by doxorubicin played a pivotal role in this pathophysiological response [31,32]. In order to better understand the role of PHD3 in the DDR and apoptosis induced by oxidative stress in cardiomyocytes, we first examined whether PHD3 is involved in the DDR induced by doxorubicin in cardiomyocytes. Consistent with previous reports, treatment of HL-1 cardiomyocytes with doxorubicin resulted in a robust activation of ATM/Chk1/p53 pathway and caspase-3 (Figure 5A). To examine the potential role of PHD3 in doxorubicin-induced DDR and apoptosis in cardiomyocytes, we pretreated HL-1 cells with dimethyloxaloylglycine (DMOG), a pan prolyl hydroxylase inhibitor, before treating them with doxorubicin. In consistent with our previous studies performed in other cell types [20], we demonstrated that DMOG dramatically inhibited the activation of both p53 and Chk1 and had no effect on the activation of ATM (Figure 5AandFigure S1A). Since depletion of PHD3 blocks the activation of Chk1 and p53 via ATR pathway but not ATM pathway[20], this result suggests that ATR, the other major upstream kinase of Chk1 and p53, is also activated by doxorubicin and PHD3 may also play a regulatory role in ATR/Chk1/p53 pathway in HL-1 cardiomyocytes. In addition, DMOG also dramatically inhibited the activation of caspase-3 induced by doxorubicin in HL-1 (Figure 5A). Since HIF-1alpha can be stabilized by DMOG (Figure 3A), it is important to examine whether HIF-1alpha plays a role in the activation of Chk1/p53. Because HIF-1alpha protein is very unstable at normoxic condition, we overexpressed the normaxia-stable HIF-1alphaPP/AGin HL-1 cells and then treated the cells with doxorubicin. As shown infigure 5B, overexpression of HIF-1alphaPP/AGhad no effect on the activation of Chk1 and p53, suggesting that the increased protein level of HIF-1alpha is not required for the inhibitory effect of DMOG on ATR/Chk1/p53 pathway. Finally, to confirm the specific role of PHD3 in ATR/Chk1/p53 pathway, we transfected HL-1 cells with si-PHD3 oligos to knock down the expression of endogenous PHD3 and demonstrated that PHD3 was crucial for the activation of Chk1 and p53 induced by doxorubicin in HL-1 cardiomyocytes (Figure 5C). It was recently reported that DDR plays an essential role in cardiomyocyte apoptosis induced by doxorubicin [31]. Consistently, we demonstrated that knocking down the expression of Chk-1 dramatically inhibited the cleavage and activation of caspase-3 induced by doxorubicin in HL-1 cells, suggesting that the activation of Chk-1 is required for cardiomyocyte apoptosis induced by doxorubicin (Figure 6A and B). Furthermore, we performed TUNEL staining assay and demonstrated that DMOG, which can inhibit Chk1 activation (Figure 5A), significantly inhibited HL-1 cell apoptosis induced by doxorubicin (Figure 6C and D), suggesting that PHD3 enzymatic activity may be crucial for cardiomyocyte apoptosis induced by doxorubicin. To determine whether the inhibitory effects of DMOG on the DDR and apoptosis were also preserved in primary cardiomyocytes, we isolated neonatal rat ventricular myocytes (NRVM) and performed similar experiments described above. As shown inFigure 7A, the activation of p53, Chk1 and caspase-3 were markedly inhibited by DMOG in NRVM. In addition, doxorubicin-induced apoptosis of NRVM was also significantly inhibited in the presence of DMOG (Figure 7B and C). In summary, these data suggest that PHD3 may play a pivotal role in the DDR in cardiomyocytes. Inhibition or depletion of PHD3 inhibits Chk1/p53 activation and subsequent apoptosis caused by doxorubicin in cardiomyocytes. To determine the direct role of ROS in the DDR in cardiomyocytes, HL-1 cells or NRVM were treated with H2O2in the presence of DMOG or KU-55933, an ATM specific inhibitor. Not surprisingly, treatment of H2O2led to a robust activation of ATM and Chk1 (Figure 8A). The activation of Chk1 was partially inhibited by KU55933, suggesting that ATM partially contributes to the activation of Chk1 induced by H2O2in cardiomyocytes (Figure 8A). Interestingly, although DMOG had no effect on ATM activation induced by H2O2, it almost completely inhibited the activation of Chk1 in HL-1 cardiomyocytes (Figure 8A), suggesting ATR is the major upstream kinase for Chk1 activation induced by H2O2. It is well accepted that reperfusion injury is mainly caused by the oxidative stress invoked by re-oxygenation. To determine whether oxidative stress resulted from hypoxia/re-oxygenation activates the DDR in cardiomyocytes, we cultured HL-1 cells under hypoxic condition for 6 hours and then returned them back to normoxic condition for further culturing. As shown inFigure 8BandFigure S2, re-oxygenation strongly activated ATM/Chk1 whereas pretreatment of cells with DMOG dramatically inhibited the activation of Chk1. Taken together, these results suggest that the DDR can be activated by oxidative stress associated with H2O2or hypoxia/re-oxygenation in cardiomyocytes and that PHD3 may play a pivotal role in this response. To further define the role of PHD3 in the DDR and apoptosis in cardiomyocytes, neonatal mouse ventricular myocytes (NMVM) were isolated from PHD3None/None; Cre+/-and control littermates, and exposed to either doxorubicin or H2O2. As shown inFigure 8CandFigure S1B, depletion of PHD3 markedly inhibited Chk1 activation induced by doxorubicin or H2O2but not ATM activation. Notably, although treatment of neocarzinostatin, which induces DNA double-strand break, strongly activated ATM, it barely activated Chk1 in NMVM. Finally, hypoxia/re-oxygenation induced a substantial amount of apoptosis of NMVM with wild type PHD3 (Figure 8D and E). As expected, depletion of PHD3 significantly inhibited the apoptosis induced by hypoxia/re-oxygenation (Figure 8D and E). We have demonstrated for the first time that depletion of PHD3 protects the heart from myocardial injury and inhibits cardiomyocyte apoptosis induced by I/R in vivo or hypoxia in vitro in both HIF-1alpha-dependent and HIF-1alpha-independent pathways. Depletion or inhibition of PHD3 in cardiomyocytes further stabilizes HIF-1alpha at hypoxic condition and dramatically inhibits Chk1/p53 activation induced by doxorubicin, H2O2or hypoxia/re-oxygenation, contributing to the cardioprotective effect seen with the depletion of PHD3. Oxygen plays a key role in energy metabolism and is essential for the survival of aerobic organisms. Lack of oxygen will trigger a series of HIF-mediated adaptive responses [33]. Activation of the HIF pathway can turn on a large number of genes that are involved in the regulation of angiogenesis, vascular remodeling, cell survival and metabolic reprogramming to combat against hypoxia-induced damage. It is well documented that activation of the HIF-1alpha protects the heart from ischemia or I/R induced injury [8] [7,15]. Notably, partial depletion of HIF-1alpha completely abolishes the ischemic preconditioning-induced cardioprotection in HIF-1alpha+/-mice [34], suggesting that the abundance of HIF-1alpha protein is a determining factor for its cardioprotective effect. It has been demonstrated that PHD family proteins play a central role in the regulation of the HIF-1alpha stability[35]. When oxygen availability is limited, PHD enzymatic activity will be inhibited, resulting in stabilization of HIF-1alpha protein and activation of HIF-1 pathway [35]. Although PHD2 is the major HIF-1alpha prolyl-4 hydroxylase in the heart and depletion of PHD3 alone has no effect on cardiac HIF-1alpha protein level at physiological condition, PHD3 has been suggested to play a compensative role in the regulation of HIF-1alpha stability, especially when PHD2 is absent or under ischemic condition [16,17,36]. Therefore, it is not surprising that we observed an increased induction of HIF-1alpha protein at hypoxia condition in PHD3 depleted cardiomyocytes. Since our data suggest that overexpression of HIF-1alpha protects cardiomyocytes from apoptosis induced by hypoxia, the increased stabilization of HIF-1alpha may partially contribute to the cardioprotection observed in PHD3 knockout mice. Although activation of HIF pathway may be beneficial in treating or attenuating cardiac injury induced by ischemia or I/R, a growing body of evidence suggests that chronic activation of the HIF pathway also leads to cardiomyopathy [15,37,38]. In addition, activation of the HIF pathway has been implicated in many aspects of tumorigenesis because the same HIF-mediated pathways that are instrumental in cardioprotection (for example angiogenesis, anaerobic metabolism and cell survival) also promote survival of tumor cells [39]. For these reasons, caution must be taken when applying small-molecular inhibitors of PHDs to the treatment of ischemic heart diseases. In the meantime, there are a wide variety of signaling pathways that are independent of HIF pathway can be regulated by PHDs [40,41]. We previously reported that PHD3 associated with and hydroxylated human homologue ofCaenorhabditis elegansbiological clock protein CLK-2 (HCLK2), an essential component of the ATR/Chk1/p53 pathway. The hydroxylation of HCLK2 is necessary for its interaction with ATR and the subsequent activation of ATR/Chk1 and the downstream p53. Inhibiting PHD3, either with the pan prolyl hydroxylase inhibitor DMOG or hypoxia, inhibits the activation of the ATR/Chk1 pathway but not ATM/Chk2 pathway and decreases apoptosis induced by DNA damage [20]. The data presented here suggest that this PHD3-dependent regulation on ATR/Chk1/p53 pathway is conserved in cardiomyocytes and it may be possible to develop PHD3 substrate-specific inhibitors that are capable of attenuating myocardial I/R injury without affecting HIF-mediated pathways. Oxidative stress plays an important role in a wide range of heart diseases including myocardial infarction, hypertrophy and heart failure [42]. Pathologically high levels of ROS can damage cellular macromolecules such as lipids, proteins and DNA, which may eventually lead to the impairment of cardiac function [43]. Recently, it was reported that high levels of oxidative DNA damage and robust activation of the DDR are present in human hearts at end-stage cardiomyopathy, suggesting that DNA damage induced by chronic oxidative stress may contribute to the development of heart failure [44]. However, the role of the DDR induced by chronic oxidative stress observed in cardiomyopathy has not been well characterized. In contrast, acute and excessive production of ROS induced by doxorubicin was recently shown to activate the ATM/p53 pathway and promote cardiomyocyte apoptosis [32]. Partial depletion of p53 or treatment with antioxidant agents, which inhibit the activation of the ATM/p53 pathway, significantly attenuates cardiomyocyte apoptosis and contractile dysfunction [32]. p53 is a common downstream target of both the ATM/Chk2 and ATR/Chk1 pathways, the two major pathways of the DDR [45]. However, whether oxidative DNA damage activates the ATR/Chk1 pathway in cardiomyocytes is not known. Interestingly, our data demonstrate that both doxorubicin and H2O2strongly activate Chk1, and inhibition of PHD3 dramatically inhibits the activation of Chk1, p53 and subsequent apoptosis in cardiomyocytes. Considering the essential role of PHD3 in the ATR/Chk1/p53 pathway [20], it is plausible that the ATR/Chk1 pathway may also be activated by oxidative DNA damage and therefore may play an important role of in cardiomyocyte apoptosis induced by oxidative stress. Furthermore, our data demonstrates that hypoxia-reoxygenation activates the DDR in cardiomyocytes but can be inhibited with depletion or inhibition of PHD3, suggesting that DDR inhibitors such as ATM or ATR specific inhibitors may also hold promise in ameliorating cardiac damage associated with hypoxia-reoxygenation injury.