On the basis of structural features, in a combination of conserved nucleotide sequences and potential secondary structures, two types of introns can be classified in organelles, namely, group I and group II introns. None)Group I and group II introns were originally described as two families of introns that are distinguished by unique secondary structures. None)Group I introns are widely distributed over the genomes of bacteriophages,None)prokaryotes,None)organelles,None)and nuclei. None)Group II introns are present in the mitochondrial genomes of fungiNone)and plants,None)and in chloroplast genomesNone),None). The complete nucleotide sequence of the liverwort mitochondrial DNA reveals 94 possible genes in the total length of 186,608 basepairs. None)Seventeen of these genes are interrupted by a total of 32 introns (Fig. 1). Based on their sequence and structural features, twenty-five of these introns can be assigned to the group II, the remaining seven qualify asbona fidegroup I introns. Here we describe the detailed characterization of group II introns and derive the molecular evolution of the introns in the mitochondrial genome of the liverwortMarchantia polymorpha. The complete nucleotide sequence of the liverwort mitochondrial DNA was determined in the laboratory of Plant Molecular Biology, Kyoto University. Computer aided analysis was carried out against the sequence database in the GenBank (accession number M68929) using the Hitachi DNASIS program, and the BLAST, FASTA and ODEN programs (DNA Data Bank of Japan, National Institute of Genetics, Japan). Phylogenetic analysis was performed with the CLUSTALW program. In the complete nucleotide sequence of the liverwort mitochondrial DNA twenty-five group II introns can be identified by their consensus sequences and secondary structures. None)Sequence comparison of these group II introns reveals six clusters of highly similar introns. None)In order to identify the relative timing of the evolutionary processes having led to the respective clusters of group II introns, we derived the phylogenetic tree of the introns within and between the six clusters. The resulting tree not only confirms the high similarity of the introns within the respective clusters, but also suggests that intra-genomic propagation has played a role in the evolution of the different members of each intron cluster (Fig. 2). As an example of a flowering plant species,Oenothera berterianaseparated and evolved from a common ancestor with the liverwort about 400 million years ago. Accepting this time scale, the mitochondrialnad2gene of the higher plantO. berterianaand the liverwort mitochondrialnad2gene can be assumed to have evolved independently for 400 million years or more. None)Taking this time scale into account and considering the nucleotide sequence differences accumulated in thenad2gene since this separation, the high similarity between the liverwort cox1i2-cox3i1, rrn26i-cox3i2, nad7i2-rps14i, and rpl2i-nad4i introns implies that these liverwort introns arose by intra-genomic propagation within the liverwort mitochondrial genome after the separation from the evolutionary line of the higher plants (Fig. 3). The mechanism and direction of this intra-genomic propagation will be discussed below. The high similarity of these introns suggests that they are derived from a common ancestor by duplication and insertion into another site. Similar to retrotransposons, group II introns multiply by reverse transcription of the RNA, in this case the excised intron, and subsequent insertion of the cDNA into a new genomic locus. To insert the DNA fragment generated from the RNA intermediate by a reverse splicing reaction, base pairing interactions between the insertion site which interacts as an intron binding sequence (IBS) in the exon and the exon binding sequence (EBS) in the intron are required. None)This necessary compatibility between the EBS sequence of the moving intron and the IBS-like sequence of a novel insertion locus in a different exon will subsequently ensure the correct insertion of the complete new intron into the previously intron-less mRNA sequence during the reverse splicing step. Consequently, we searched the splice sites of the various group II introns in the mitochondrial mRNAs for similarities in the surrounding exon sequences for compatible IBS-like motifs. Indeed, evaluation of these IBS-similarities does indicate the direction of the intra-genomic propagation of various intron pairs in different liverwort mitochondrial genes: Intron cox1i2 has duplicated and homed into thecox3mRNA to become cox3i1 (Fig. 4), rrn26i amplified into cox3i2, and nad4i has duplicated and evolved one copy to rpl2i. This trend is especially prominent in those introns which propagated intra-genomically after the evolutionary separation from the line of the higher plants. Between these intron pairs, the potential base-pairings of the deduced EBS-IBS sequences are particularly high probably because of the short time scale since the duplication and insertion of these intron copies from the corresponding ancestral introns. None)The direction of the propagation of the nad7i2 and rps14i introns is not clear, because thepseudonad7gene has several stop codons in its coding region and the IBS-EBS sequences show the same degree of matching base-pairs in either direction. Intron propagation via an RNA intermediate requires the activity of a reverse transcriptase, which is often supplied by the ORFs sometimes encoded in group II introns. None)As the final step of amplification and transposition, homologous recombination with an endonuclease or integrase activity is needed to insert the DNA copy of the intron into the new genomic locus. None)However, these endonucleases or integrases can also act intransand can thus be encoded by other introns. For example, as is common for group II intron ORFs, some of the ORFs encoded by the group II introns in theM. polymorphamitochondrial genome do not code for proteins with endonuclease or integrase domains. The required enzymatic activity may be supplied by one or more of the proteins encoded by group I introns in the liverwort mitochondrial genome, such as the cox1i4 or cox1i8 introns. The ORFs encoded by these two introns do contain such motifs typical for an endonuclease activity,None)suggesting that they might enable or enhance homologous recombination. Thus the ORFs encoding proteins in the group I introns in liverwort mitochondria might participate in the intra-genomic propagation of the group II introns in the genome. Interestingly, these intra-genomic propagations in the liverwort mitochondrial genome are only seen for group II introns, but not for group I introns. The reason for this bias remains unclear at present. Possibly one of the three main requirements for frequent intra-genomic propagation events (reverse splicing, reverse transcription, and homologous recombination) as depicted in Fig. 4is not met by the group I introns and consequently no successful amplifications have survived the evolutionary selection to be still detectable today. While thecox1genes of higher plants contain no introns at all, there are nine introns in the liverwort mitochondrialcox1gene coding for cytochromecoxidase subunit 1. None)We have previously described that six of these introns, the 3rd, 4th, and 6th to 9th introns show all the characteristics of group I introns, while the rest of thecox1introns, the 1st, 2nd, and 5th introns, can be clearly classified as group II introns. Five of thesecox1introns, cox1i2, cox1i4, cox1i6, cox1i7, and cox1i8 are inserted at the same sites where introns have been reported in the genes of fungal mitochondrialcox1genes. None),None)To analyze the timing of the evolutionary events leading to this distribution of introns in the mitochondrialcox1gene of the liverwort relative to the intron evolution in fungi, we constructed a phylogenetic tree of the mitochondrialcox1gene from the liverwort and four species of fungi. As a reference time scale and evolutionary marker we used a nuclear gene, the ribosomal 5.8S rDNA sequencesNone),None),None),None)from the same species for an analogous phylogenetic tree. Comparison of the two derived trees shows that the mitochondrialcox1genes ofSaccharomyces cerevisiae,None)Schizosaccharomyces pombe,None)Neurospora crassaNone)andPodospora anserina,None)respectively, show less sequence divergence and have thus evolved somewhat slower betweenM. polymorphaand the four fungi than have the nuclear encoded 5.8S rDNA gene sequences (Fig. 5A and5B). In order to analyze the possibility of the liverwortcox1introns inserted at the same sites as the respectivecox1introns in the fungal genes being derived from the same ancestral intron, we compared the amino acid sequences of the ORFs encoded by the liverwort cox1i4 and cox1i8 group I introns to the respective ORFs in the analogous introns in fungi. Total database searches with the putative proteins encoded in the cox1i4 and cox1i8 introns in the liverwort indeed identified as closest matches the intron counterparts inserted at the same sites in the fungal mitochondrial genes. None)TheS. pombeORF in cox1i1 intron is most similar to the liverwort ORF in cox1i4 intron, and the liverwort ORF in cox1i8 intron identified as closest relatives the ORFs in the introns cox1i15 inP. anserina, cox1i5B inS. cerevisiae, and cox1i3 inS. pombe, respectively, as described previously. None)For these introns, the relationships and thus evolutionary origins and pathways correlate for the three features splice site (i.e. EBS/IBS), intron sequence and structure, and the encoded ORF. An analogous observation is made for the structures and EBS/IBS interaction sites of the liverwort group II intron cox1i2 and theS. cervisiaeintron cox1i1, which is inserted at the same site. However, when analyzing the ORF encoded by this intron cox1i2 in the liverwortcox1gene, similarity was found to be higher to the ORF in an intron in the fungusN. crassaintron cox1i1 (41% similarity) than to the cox1i1 intron inS. cerevisiae, which is inserted at the genomic site homologous to liverwort (35% similarity; Fig. 6). This finding suggests that the ORF in the liverwort cox1i2 intron has been horizontally replaced by the respective ORF fromN. crassa. On the other hand, the lower sequence similarity observed between the respective ORFs in the liverwort cox1i2 and cox1i5 introns is probably due to frameshift of the ORF in cox1i5 (Fig. 6). Since the respective introns were classified to same group (group 2 in Fig. 2), the intron cox1i2 (or part of it) subsequently propagated intragenomically and invaded the liverwort cox1i5 intron where it also replaced the previous ORF during the evolution (Fig. 7). A somewhat different scenario is deduced for the origin and evolution of the introns nad7i1 and rrn18i in the liverwort mitochondrial genome. These two introns most likely diverged independently and at different times from the same intron in fungi (see Fig. 2). Although intron rrn18i, unlike nad7i1, does not belong to any of the six groups by its overall sequence similarity pattern, the two ORFs encoded by the liverwort nad7i1 and rrn18i introns show higher similarity with the ORF encoded in theP. anserinaintron cox1i1 (42% and 44%, respectively) (Fig. 8). This observation implies that this ORF transposed horizontally and separately into each of the two liverwort introns from the ancestral fungal intron (Fig. 9). We have previously identified an analogous evolutionary pathway for the liverwort cox1i6 and cox1i7 introns and their encoded frame-shifted ORFs. None)As described above for the liverwort introns cox1i4 and cox1i8, the liverwort intron cox1i6 is also a cognate homolog of theN. crassaintron cox1i3 and theP. anserinaintron cox1i7A. Likewise, liverwort cox1i7 is related to theS. cerevisiaecox1i4 and theP. anserinacox1i9 introns, which are apparently all derived from the same ancestral intron and encoded ORF.