Addictive oncogenic kinase signaling perpetuates tumor phenotypes, including sustained cell proliferation, insensitivity to apoptosis, and increased angiogenesis. The Ras/Raf/MEK/ERK pathway is aberrantly activated in most tumor cells due toRasorRafmutations (1). Sorafenib (Nexavar), an oral multi-kinase inhibitor that inhibits several aberrantly activated kinases in tumor cells, including c-Raf, B-Raf, PDGFR (platelet-derived growth factor receptor), and VEGFRs (vascular endothelial growth factor receptors) 1-3, has been used for the treatment of advanced kidney and liver tumors (2,3). It has also been tested in hundreds of clinical trials against a variety of malignancies, including those of colon, lung, and breast. Unfortunately, the anticancer mechanisms of sorafenib and most targeted anticancer drugs remain poorly understood. Inevitable tumor recurrence due to acquired drug resistance has significantly limited clinical applications of targeted therapies. Induction of apoptosis in cancer cells has emerged as a key effect of targeted therapies (4). For example, clinical response to EGFR (epidermal growth factor receptor) targeted therapy is correlated with induction of apoptosis in tumor cells, and defective apoptosis regulation contributes to resistance of EGFR targeted therapy (5). The anticancer effects of sorafenib are also thought to be mediated by apoptosis induction in cancer cells, in addition to its anti-proliferative and anti-angiogenic effects (6). Sorafenib kills a variety of tumor cells in vitro and in vivo, and its proapoptotic activity is significantly enhanced when combined with genotoxic drugs (7). Recent studies suggest that sorafenib-induced apoptosis is associated with downregulation of the antiapoptotic protein Mcl-1 and inhibition of eIF4E (eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E) phosphorylation (8-10). However, Mcl-1 depletion alone is often insufficient to trigger apoptosis in solid tumor cells, and the timing of these changes does not correlate with that of apoptosis induction in sorafenib-treated cells (7). Therefore, how sorafenib triggers apoptosis in cancer cells remains unresolved. PUMA (p53 upregulated modulator of apoptosis), a BH3-only Bcl-2 family member, functions as a critical initiator of apoptosis in cancer cells (11). Its transcription is directly activated by p53 in response to DNA damage. Lack of PUMA induction renders p53-deficient cancer cells refractory to conventional cytotoxic chemotherapeutic drugs (12). PUMA can also be induced in a p53-independent manner by a variety of non-genotoxic stimuli, such as the pan-kinase inhibitor UCN-01(13), the EGFR inhibitors gefitinib and erlotinib (14), and tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) (15). p53-independent PUMA induction can be mediated by the transcription factors p73, FoxO3a (Forkhead Box O3a), and NF-kappaB (nuclear factor kappaB) (13-16). Upon its induction, PUMA potently induces apoptosis in cancer cells by antagonizing antiapoptotic Bcl-2 family members, such as Bcl-2 and Bcl-XL, and activating the proapoptotic members Bax and Bak, which results in mitochondrial dysfunction and caspase activation cascade (17-19). In this study, we found that sorafenib kills colon cancer cells in vitro and in vivo by activating PUMA through NF-kappaB. Our results shed light on the anticancer mechanism of sorafenib, and provide a rationale for manipulating PUMA and other apoptosis regulators to improve the efficacy of targeted therapies. We analyzed the effects of sorafenib in colorectal cancer cells because these cells were initially used for characterizing the anticancer activities of sorafenib (20,21). Treatingp53-wildtype (WT) HCT116 colon cancer cells with 5 to 20 mumol/L sorafenib strongly induced PUMA protein expression in a dose- and time-dependent manner (Figures 1a and b). PUMAmRNA was also induced by sorafenib (Figure 1c). The peak levels ofPUMAmRNA and protein were detected at 16-24 hours following sorafenib treatment (Figures 1b and c). The induction of PUMA by sorafenib was found to be intact inp53-KO HCT116 cells (Figures 1a and c), and occurred in all of the colon cancer cells analyzed, includingp53-WT Lim1405, Lovo, and RKO colon cancer cells, andp53-mutant DLD1 and HT29 colon cancer cells, as well as in HepG2 and Huh-7 hepatocellular carcinoma cells (Figure 1d). Furthermore, analysis of other Bcl-2 family members showed that sorafenib treatment did not induce the BH3-only proteins Bad, Bid, Bim, and Noxa, but led to degradation of Mcl-1 as previously reported (8), and a slight induction of Bcl-2 (Figure 1e). These results indicate that PUMA is selectively induced by sorafenib and may mediate its anticancer effects. We then investigated the mechanism by which sorafenib induces PUMA in the absence of p53. Knockdown ofc-Rafby siRNA induced PUMA expression (Figures 2a and b), while depletion of other sorafenib targets, includingB-Raf,VEGFR2,PDGFR-beta, andc-Kit, did not increase PUMA expression (Supplementary Figure S1a and b), suggesting that PUMA induction by sorafenib results from c-Raf inhibition. FoxO3a, a transcription factor that can induce PUMA following its de-phosphorylation and nuclear translocation (22), remained phosphorylated in sorafenib-treated cells (Supplementary Figure S1c). Knockdown of FoxO3a by siRNA did not affect PUMA induction by sorafenib (Supplementary Figure S1d), indicating that FoxO3a is not involved in PUMA induction by sorafenib. The expression of p73, another transcription factor that can induce PUMA in p53-deficient cells (16), was unchanged after sorafenib treatment (data not shown). Sorafenib treatment also did not affect the expression and phosphorylation of the transcription factors STAT1 and STAT3 (Supplementary Figure S1e), which have been implicated in the effects of sorafenib (23). The p65 subunit of NF-kappaB was recently identified as a transcriptional activator of PUMA in response to TNF-alpha treatment (15). Suppression of p65 expression by siRNA reduced PUMA levels following sorafenib treatment in both HCT116 and DLD1 cells (Figures 2c and d). In support of the requirement for p65, the induction of PUMA by sorafenib was also suppressed inp65-KO mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) (Figure 2d). Activation of NF-kappaB signaling is characterized by p65 phosphorylation on several residues and its subsequent translocation to the nucleus, where it activates transcription of target genes (24). We found that sorafenib treatment for 4-16 hours enhanced phosphorylation of S536, the major regulatory site of p65 (24), in both WT andp53-KO HCT116 cells (Figure 2e). Phosphorylation of S276, another site associated with p65 activation (24), was also increased after sorafenib treatment, while that of the controversial S468 site was unchanged (Supplementary Figure S2a). Translocation of p65 to the nucleus was detected in cells treated with sorafenib or the control TNF-alpha by p65 immunofluorescence (Figure 2f), and by nuclear fractionation (Figure 3a). Consistent with NF-kappaB activation, transcription ofTNF-alpha, a target of p65, was increased in response to sorafenib treatment (Figure 2g). But TNF-alpha secretion was not detected in sorafenib-treated cells (data not shown). To determine how NF-kappaB activatesPUMAtranscription in response to sorafenib treatment, cells were pre-treated with BAY 11-7082, an NF-kappaB inhibitor suppressing p65 nuclear translocation (Figure 3a,left). NF-kappaB inhibition by BAY 11-7082 impeded PUMA induction by sorafenib or TNF-alpha (Figure 3a,right), suggesting that PUMA induction by sorafenib is mediated by p65 nuclear translocation. However, the change in p65 nuclear translocation detected by fractionation, which might be incomplete, seems to be less than that of PUMA induction. To determine whether NF-kappaB can directly activatePUMAtranscription,p53-KO HCT116 cells were transfected with luciferase reporter constructs containing different regions of thePUMApromoter (Frags A-D;Figure 3b,left) (16). The previously identified NF-kappaB responsive element distal to Fragment D that is required for PUMA induction by TNF-alpha (15), was not activated in sorafenib-treated cells (data not shown). In contrast, the proximal 495-bp region of thePUMApromoter (Frags A and E) could be strongly activated upon sorafenib treatment (Figure 3b,right). Analysis of the DNA sequence in this region identified at least 5 previously unrecognized putative kappaB sites (Figure 3c). Mutations of all 5 kappaB sites completely blockedPUMApromoter activation by sorafenib treatment (Figure 3d), suggesting that multiple kappaB sites contribute to the activation of thePUMApromoter. Among the 5 sites analyzed, the third kappaB site (kappaB 3) seems to suppress the activity ofPUMApromoter (Figure 3d). Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) revealed that p65 was recruited to the region containing the kappaB sites following sorafenib treatment (Figure 3e). Together, these results indicate that p65 directly binds to multiple kappaB sites in the proximalPUMApromoter region to drive its transcriptional activation in response to sorafenib treatment. The canonical pathway of p65 activation is mediated by IkappaB phosphorylation and degradation, for example, in response to TNF-alpha treatment. Surprisingly, sorafenib treatment did not lead to IkappaB phosphorylation or degradation (Supplementary Figure S2b). Transfecting cells with IkappaBalphaM, a non-degradable mutant of IkappaB (15), did not affect sorafenib-induced PUMA expression (Figure 4a), suggesting that p65 activation and PUMA induction by sorafenib are not mediated by the canonical NF-kappaB pathway. Further analysis of other kinases known to activate NF-kappaB revealed that glycogen synthase kinase 3beta (GSK3beta) is involved in activating p65 following sorafenib treatment. Knockdown of GSK3beta by siRNA suppressed sorafenib-induced p65 nuclear translocation determined by nuclear fractionation (Figure 4b), and by immunofluorescence (Supplementary Figure S3). GSK3beta depletion also significantly reduced the levels of PUMA following sorafenib treatment in both HCT116 and RKO colon cancer cells (Figure 4c). Furthermore, sorafenib treatment suppressed Ser9 phosphorylation of GSK3beta, which inhibits its kinase activity (25), in both WT andp53-KO HCT116 cells (Figure 4d). It has been shown that the ERK kinase can prime GSK3beta Ser9 phosphorylation to inhibit its activity (26). We found that sorafenib exposure strongly impaired phosphorylation of ERK1/2 (T202/Y204) throughout the course of treatment (Figure 4e). To determine whether ERK inhibition contributes to the activation of GSK3beta, p65 and PUMA, we treated cells with the ERK inhibitor PD98059. ERK inhibition by PD98059 phenocopies sorafenib treatment in blocking GSK3beta Ser9 phosphorylation, and promoting p65 phosphorylation and PUMA expression (Figure 4f). Together, these results demonstrate that PUMA induction by sorafenib is mediated by ERK inhibition, relief of GSK3beta inhibition, and subsequent p65 activation. We then determined the role of PUMA induction in sorafenib-induced apoptosis. Apoptosis induced by 5-20 mumol/L sorafenib was markedly reduced inPUMA-KO cells but remained intact inp53-KO cells, in comparison with the parental HCT116 cells (Figure 5aandSupplementary Figure S4a). Annexin V/PI staining confirmed the suppression of sorafenib-induced apoptosis by the absence of PUMA (Figure 5b). Sorafenib-induced and PUMA-dependent apoptosis is not cell line-specific, and was also observed in DLD1 colon cancer cells (Figure 5c). In addition, sorafenib-induced apoptosis was found to be significantly reduced inp65-KO andPUMA-KO MEFs compared to WT MEFs (Figure 5c). PUMA deficiency inhibited sorafenib-induced mitochondrial events, including activation of caspases 3, 8, and 9 (Figure 5d), mitochondrial membrane permeabilization (Figure 5e), and cytochromecrelease (Figure 5f). Reduced apoptosis inPUMA-KO cells does not seem to result from altered expression of other Bcl-2 family members or eIF4E (Supplementary Figure S4b). Furthermore, analysis of long-term cell survival by colony formation assay showed thatPUMA-KO cells were less sensitive to sorafenib than WT cells (Figure 5g). Therefore, the killing effect of sorafenib on cancer cells is mediated by PUMA through the mitochondrial pathway. Sorafenib has mostly been used in combination with conventional cytotoxic therapies for cancer treatment. We reasoned that the chemosensitization effects of sorafenib are mediated by PUMA induction, because of the distinct mechanisms of PUMA activation by sorafenib and other drugs. Indeed, we found that sorafenib combined with cisplatin, which can enhance killing of various tumor cells (7), induced PUMA at a much higher level than sorafenib or cisplatin alone (Figure 6a). This is consistent with concurrent PUMA induction through both p53-dependent and -independent pathways by cisplatin and sorafenib, respectively. Accordingly, the level of apoptosis was also significantly higher in WT HCT116 cells, but not inPUMA-KO cells following the combination treatment (Figure 6b). A combination of sorafenib with UCN-01, a kinase inhibitor that induces PUMA through a pathway mediated by FoxO3a (13), also showed PUMA-dependent enhancement in apoptosis induction (Figure 6c). These results prompted us to test whether manipulating apoptosis by BH3 mimetics can sensitize cells to sorafenib. GX15-070, a BH3 mimetic compound analogous to PUMA in inhibiting all antiapoptotic Bcl-2 family members (27), markedly enhanced sorafenib-induced apoptosis in HCT116 cells (Figure 6d). GX15-070 also partially restored sorafenib sensitivity inPUMA-KO cells (Figure 6e). These data suggest that PUMA mediates the chemosensitization effects of sorafenib, and manipulating apoptosis can improve the therapeutic efficacy of sorafenib. Sorafenib can effectively suppress the growth of colon cancer xenograft tumors (28). To determine if PUMA mediates the antitumor effects of sorafenib, WT andPUMA-KO HCT116 cells were injected subcutaneously into nude mice to establish xenograft tumors. Mice were then treated with 25 mg/kg sorafenib or the control vehicle by oral gavage for 7 consecutive days, as previously described (28). WT andPUMA-KO tumors were not different in growth after the control treatment (Figures 7a and b). Sorafenib treatment suppressed the growth of WT tumors by 60-80%, consistent with the previous report (28). In contrast,PUMA-KO tumors were significantly less sensitive to sorafenib treatment compared to WT tumors (Figures 7a, b, andTable S1), indicating that loss of PUMA suppressed the antitumor activity of sorafenib. Following sorafenib treatment, p65 phosphorylation and PUMA expression were found to be increased in xenograft tumors (Figure 7c). TUNEL staining revealed significant apoptosis induction in tumor tissues from the sorafenib-treated mice, but not the control mice. In contrast, apoptosis was barely detectable in thePUMA-KO tumors (Figure 7d). Analysis of apoptosis by active caspase 3 staining confirmed PUMA-dependent apoptosis in sorafenib-treated tumors (Figure 7e). Therefore, the in vivo antitumor activity of sorafenib is largely dependent on PUMA and involves NF-kappaB activation. Sorafenib is the first FDA-approved multi-kinase inhibitor drug that targets the Ras/Raf/MEK/ERK pathway, which is aberrantly activated in a majority of cancers due toRasorRafmutations (1). Sorafenib and other multi-kinase inhibitor drugs, such as sunitinib, can inhibit cell proliferation, promote apoptosis, and suppress tumor angiogenesis. While growth inhibition by sorafenib has been extensively characterized, the exact mechanism of sorafenib-induced apoptosis has not been clearly identified. Our results demonstrate that PUMA is activated following sorafenib exposure, and is necessary for sorafenib-induced apoptosis in colon cancer cells. Pharmacokinetic studies showed that sorafenib plasma concentrations could be as high as 10-20 muM (29). However, sorafenib is known to be bound to plasma proteins (7), and the biological active concentration of sorafenib in cultured cells may be higher than that in plasma of patients. backboneSorafenib-induced apoptosis was previously associated with degradation of Mcl-1 and inhibition of eIF4E phosphorylation (8-10). Mcl-1 depletion alone can induce apoptosis in hematopoietic cells (30), but is insufficient to induce apoptosis in the colon cancer cells we have studied, likely due to high levels of other antiapoptotic proteins such as Bcl-XL. Induction of PUMA, on the other hand, can inhibit all antiapoptotic Bcl-2 family members, and activate the intrinsic apoptotic pathway (11). The increasing PUMA expression between 8-24 hours following sorafenib treatment also reconciles the previously noted "temporal disconnect" phenomenon (7), in which loss of eIF4E phosphorylation and Mcl-1 expression occurs within the first 4 hours (10), much earlier than apoptotic events detected at 24 hours after sorafenib treatment. In addition to PUMA, other BH3-only proteins can also contribute to sorafenib-induced apoptosis. For example, sorafenib was shown to activate Bim to induce apoptosis in leukemia cells (31). The relative contributions of different BH3-only proteins are likely to be cell type-dependent. PUMA-dependent apoptosis can be triggered by oncogene activation and functions as a safe-guide mechanism against oncogenic signaling (11). Induction of PUMA seems to be attributable to c-Raf inhibition by sorafenib. It is unexpected that the induction of PUMA relies on NF-kappaB, which is better known for its pro-survival activity. But NF-kappaB can clearly promote apoptosis under certain conditions (32). Recent studies have shown that the NF-kappaB signaling cascade can stimulate TNF-alpha secretion, which sets up a feedforward loop to promote apoptosis in response to extensive DNA damage (33). NF-kappaB activation by sorafenib does not involve IkappaB degradation, but is regulated by GSK3beta through ERK inhibition. These results reinforce the multi-facet nature of NF-kappaB signaling, and suggest a potential role of NF-kappaB signaling in mediating responses to targeted therapies, which has not been appreciated. Sorafenib is effective against a variety of malignancies such as renal cell carcinoma, hepatocellular carcinoma, breast cancer, colon cancer, non-small cell lung cancer, and melanoma (7). Currently, there are over 400 clinical trials involving sorafenib (http://www.clinicaltrials.gov). Our data demonstrate that PUMA-mediated apoptosis is critical for the anticancer activities of sorafenib in colon cancer cells, implying that PUMA induction can be used as a marker for therapeutic response to sorafenib, and possibly for other targeted drugs as well. Sorafenib has been most promising when used in combination with other chemotherapeutic agents. Depending on dosage and cell type, sorafenib combined with other drugs has additive and sometimes synergistic anticancer effects. In vitro and in vivo studies showed that sorafenib potentiates the effects of genotoxic agents, such as temozolomide, radiation, and melphalan (21,34). Encouraging results have been obtained from clinical trials for combining sorafenib with genotoxic adjuvant treatments that involve cisplatin (35,36). Our data suggest that the sensitization effect of sorafenib on cisplatin can be mediated by concurrent PUMA induction via both p53-dependent and -independent mechanisms. Sorafenib can also enhance tumor cell apoptosis in conjunction with non-genotoxic drugs, such as mTOR inhibitors (37), histone deacetylase inhibitors, and EGFR inhibitors (38). Ongoing clinical trials are testing combinations of sorafenib with erlotinib (39), and the farnesyltransferase inhibitor tipifarnib (40). It is perhaps understandable that these drugs work better in combination, because they likely induce PUMA through different pathways (14,41,42). Identifying effective drug combinations will be the key for clinical applications of sorafenib and other targeted drugs. PUMA induction may serve as a useful indicator for identifying such combination regimens. Acquired drug resistance represents a major limitation of chemotherapy, and more so for targeted therapy. The pan-Bcl-2 inhibitor GX15-070 restored apoptosis in sorafenib-resistantPUMA-KO cells, suggesting that manipulating apoptotic pathways can help overcome sorafenib resistance. GX15-070 was also found to potentate the effect of sorafenib in chemo-resistant cancer cells lacking CD95 expression, or with overexpression of antiapoptotic c-FLIP (43). The BH3 mimetic compound ABT-737 is effective in inducing apoptosis in HCC that would normally be cytostatic to sorafenib treatment (44). Another case of sorafenib resistance in HCC is shown to be caused by activation of PI3K/Akt signaling (45), and can be overcome by PI3K/Akt inhibition (46). We found that UCN-01, also a PI3K/Akt inhibitor, enhanced the killing effect of sorafenib in a PUMA-dependent manner, likely through FoxO3a-mediated PUMA induction (13). Together, these observations suggest that the PUMA-mediated apoptotic pathway might be explored to overcome resistance to targeted therapies. However, the clinical relevance of our findings remains to be established using more relevant cell models and human patient specimens. In conclusion, we demonstrate that activation of PUMA by NF-kappaB mediates the apoptotic and anticancer effects of sorafenib in colon cancer cells in vitro and in vivo. PUMA induction may be a useful indicator for therapeutic response to sorafenib, and possibly other targeted drugs. The human cancer cell lines, including HCT116, RKO, Lim2405, LOVO, HT29 and DLD1 colorectal cancer cells, and HepG2 and Huh-7 hepatocellular carcinoma cells, were obtained from American Type Culture Collection (Manassas, VA). Isogenicp53-knockout (KO) andPUMA-KO colon cancer cell lines were previously described (19,47). All cell lines were cultured in McCoy's 5A modified media (Invitrogen) supplemented with 10% defined FBS (HyClone), 100 units/ml penicillin, and 100 mug/ml streptomycin (Invitrogen). Cells were maintained in a 37 degrees C incubator at 5% CO2. For drug treatment, cells were plated in 12-well plates at 20-30% density 24 hours prior to treatment. Sorafenib (LC Laboratories), BAY 11-7082, PD98059 (Merck Chemicals), GX15-070 (Cayman Chemical), UCN-01 (Sigma) were diluted with DMSO, cisplatin (Sigma) with 0.9% NaCl, and human TNF-alpha (R D system) with PBS. For NF-kappaB inhibition, cells were pre-treated with BAY 11-7082 for 1 hour before sorafenib treatment. Western blotting was performed as previously described (17). The antibodies used included those against PUMA (19), Akt, phospho-Akt (S473), Bad, Bid, active caspase 3, caspase 8, caspase 9, ERK, phospho-ERK (T202/Y204), IkappaB, phospho-IkappaB (S22/23), p65, phospho-p65 (Ser536, Ser276, and Ser468), phospho-FoxO3a, STAT1, phospho-STAT1 (Y701), STAT3, phospho-STAT3 (Y705), glycogen synthase kinase 3beta (GSK3beta), phospho-GSK3beta (S9) (Cell Signaling), Bak, FoxO3a (Millipore), Bax, cytochrome oxidase subunit IV (Invitrogen), Mcl-1, IkappaB, cytochromec, lamin A/C, eIF4E (Santa Cruz), beta-actin (Sigma), Bim, Noxa, Bcl-2, alpha-tubulin (EMD Biosciences), Bcl-XL(BD Transduction), and Bcl-w (Enzo Life Sciences). Western blot band intensities were quantified using ImageJ software (http://rsbweb.nih.gov/ij/). Total RNA was isolated from sorafenib-treated cells using the Mini RNA Isolation II Kit (Zymo Research) according to the manufacturer's protocol. One mug of total RNA was used to generate cDNA using SuperScript II reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen). Real-time PCR was carried out as before forPUMAandGAPDH(13). Cells were transfected with Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Knockdown experiments were performed 24 hours before sorafenib treatment using 400 pmoles of siRNA. GSK3beta(sc-35527) andVEGFR2siRNA (sc-29318) were from Santa Cruz. All other siRNA, including those against humanp65(15),c-Raf(AAGCACGCTTAGATTGGAATA-dTdT),PDGFRbeta(GCAUCUUCAACAGCCUCUA-dTdT),B-Raf(ACAGAGACCUCAAGAGUAA-UU),c-Kit(GGCCGACAAAAGGAGAUCU-dTdT), and the control scrambled siRNA, were from Dharmacon. A non-degradable IkappaBalpha super repressor mutant (S32/36A; IkappaBalphaM) was previously described (15). PUMAluciferase reporter constructs were generated by cloning genomic fragments (Fragments A-E) into the pBV-Luc plasmid as previously described (16). Mutations were introduced into the p65 binding sites of Fragment A using QuickChange XL site-directed mutagenesis kit (Agilent Technologies). For reporter assays, cells were transfected with the WT or mutantPUMAreporter along with the transfection control beta-galactosidase reporter pCMVbeta (Promega). Cell lysates were collected and luciferase activities were measured and normalized to those of pCMVbeta as previously described (48). All reporter experiments were performed in triplicate and repeated thrice. ChIP was performed using the Chromatin Immunoprecipitation Assay kit (Upstate Biotechnology) as previously described (47), with p65 antibody (Santa Cruz) for chromatin precipitation. The precipitates were analyzed by PCR using primers 5'-GTCGGTCTGTGTACGCATCG-3' and 5'-CCCGCGTGACGCTACGGCCC-3'. HCT116 cells pre-treated with BAY11-7082 or transfected withGSK3betasiRNA were subjected to sorafenib or TNF-alpha treatment for 3 hours. NF-kappaB nuclear translocation was analyzed by nuclear fractionation and immunofluorescence. For nuclear fractionation, nuclear extracts were isolated from cells plated and treated in 75-cm2flasks using the NE-PER nuclear/cytoplasmic extraction kit (Thermo Fisher) according to the manufacturer's instructions, and probed by Western blotting for p65. For immunofluoscence, cells plated and treated in chamber slides were subject to primary staining with anti-p65 (Cell Signaling) overnight at 4 degrees C, and secondary staining with the anti-rabbit AlexaFluor 488-conjugated secondary antibody (Invitrogen) for 1 hour at RT, as previously described (48). Images were acquired with an Olympus IX71 microscope. Nuclear staining with Hoechst 33258 (Invitrogen) was performed as previously described (49). Annexin V/propidium iodide (PI) staining was performed using annexin-Alexa 488 (Invitrogen) and PI as described (50). For analysis of cytochromecrelease, mitochondrial and cytosolic fractions were isolated by differential centrifugation (18), followed by Western blotting for cytochromec. For colony formation assays, the treated cells were plated in 12-well plates at appropriate dilutions, and allowed to grow for 10-14 days before staining with crystal violet (Sigma). For detection of mitochondrial membrane potential change, the treated cells were stained by MitoTracker Red CMXRos (Invitrogen) for 15 minutes at room temperature (RT), and then analyzed by flow cytometry. All animal experiments were approved by the University of Pittsburgh Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. Female 5-6 week-old Nu/Nu mice (Charles River) were housed in a sterile environment with micro isolator cages and allowed access to water and chowad libitum. Mice were injected subcutaneously in both flanks with 4*106WT orPUMA-KO HCT116 cells. Following tumor growth for 7 days, mice were treated daily with sorafenib at 25 mg/kg by oral gavage for 7 consecutive days. Sorafenib was dissolved in Cremephor EL/95% ethanol (50:50) as a 4* stock solution (20), and diluted to the final concentration with sterile water before use. Tumor growth was monitored by calipers, and tumor volumes were calculated according to the formula 1/2 * length * width2. Mice were euthanized when tumors reached ~1.0 cm3in size. Tumors were dissected and fixed in 10% formalin and embedded in paraffin. TUNEL and active caspase 3 immunostaining was performed on 5 muM paraffin-embedded tumor sections as previously described (51), with an AlexaFluor 594-conjugated secondary antibody (Invitrogen) for signal detection. Statistical analyses were carried out using GraphPad Prism IV software. Pvalues were calculated by the student'st-test and were considered significant ifP less than 0.05. The means +/- one standard deviation (s.d.) were displayed in the figures.