The transition-metal-catalyzed denitrogenative transannulation of pyridotriazoles represents an efficient method for the synthesis of fused nitrogen-containing heterocycles. 1This method is based on the ability of pyridotriazole to exist in an equilibrium with diazo-formA,2,3which can be trapped with Rh(ii) to form the reactive pyridyl carbene intermediateB, capable of reacting with terminal alkynes1Noneto produce valuable indolizines3(Scheme 1). 4,5However, this transannulation reaction has several shortcomings. Thus, a Cl substituent at the C-7 position (AG, activating group) and an electron withdrawing ester group (EWG) at the C-3 position of the pyridotriazoles were requisite to facilitate the formation of a sufficient amount of the open form of triazoleAeven at room temperature and subsequently generate indolizines3. 2,3,6In addition, the reaction was limited to aryl alkynes only (eqn (1)). 1NoneHerein, we report the first general and efficient Cu-catalyzed transannulation of pyridotriazoles1with terminal alkynes2to form indolizines3(eqn (2)). This newly developed method features several important advantages over the previously reported Rh-catalyzed protocol. 1NoneThus, it is highly practical as it employs a cheap Cu-catalyst and efficiently operates under aerobic conditions. It is also more general demonstrating a much broader reaction scope, as unactivated pyridotriazoles1and aliphatic alkynes2now become competent reaction partners (eqn (2)). The above-mentioned transannulation reaction of pyridotriazoles1(eqn (1)),1as well as the further developed and widely used transannulation reactions ofN-sulfonyl 1,2,3-triazoles,7require the use of a Rh-catalyst,8which is one of the most expensive and rare metals used in catalysis. Naturally, the development of alternative catalysts for transannulation reactions of triazoles would dramatically increase the synthetic applicability of this methodology. 9Accordingly, aiming at the discovery of a cheaper catalyst and at expanding the scope of transannulation reactions of pyridotriazoles, we turned our attention to the potential employment of copper catalysts. 10To ensure sufficient amounts of the open formAof the unactivated pyridotriazole, we tested the potential transannulation reaction at elevated temperatures. 3Thus, we tested various copper catalysts in the reaction of unactivated pyridotriazole1awith phenylacetylene2a(Table 1). While CuCl was found to be inefficient (entry 1), the use of Cu(i) and Cu(ii) triflates led to the formation of the corresponding indolizine3ain moderate yields (entries 2 and 3). 11Delightfully, the more electrophilic Cu(MeCN)4PF6catalyst turned out to be even more efficient in the formation of3a(entry 4). Finally, after optimization of the temperature (entries 5, 6), a virtually quantitative yield of3awas achieved (entry 6). Moreover, we were pleased to find that this reaction works equally efficiently under aerobic conditions (entry 7). As expected, under thermal conditions no reaction occurred (entry 8). Moreover, it was found that Rh2(hfb)4is not a capable catalyst for this reaction (entry 9). NoneTriazole (1 equiv. ), alkyne (3 equiv. ), Cu cat. (15 mol%), toluene (1 M) in a Wheaton V-vial capped with a Mininert syringe valve. NoneGC/MS yields are given. None1.2 equiv. of alkyne was used. NoneIn air with 1.2 equiv. of alkyne. NoneLower catalyst loading led to decreased reaction yields. 11NonePolymerization of the alkyne was observed; hfb = heptafluorobutyrate. Having the optimized conditions in hand, we investigated the scope of this Cu-catalyzed transannulation reaction of pyridotriazoles with terminal alkynes (Table 2). A variety of aryl alkynes bearing electron-neutral, electron withdrawing and electron donating substituents atortho-,meta- andpara-positions produced the corresponding indolizines3in high yields upon reaction with pyridotriazole1a(Table 2, entries 1-10). 12Heteroaromatic alkynes such as 3-thienyl acetylene and enyne led to the indolizines3k,lin reasonable yields (entries 11 and 12). We were pleased to find that in contrast to the previously reported Rh-catalyzed reaction, aliphatic alkynes were also competent reactants. Thus, benzyl-,n-butyl, andc-hexyl acetylenes reacted smoothly to produce the corresponding indolizines in good yields (entries 13-15). To our delight, functional groups including benzyloxy- andN-phthalimido were perfectly tolerated under the reaction conditions (entries 16 and 17). Moreover, while our group previously reported the Rh-catalyzed transannulation reaction of pyridotriazoles with nitriles,1Nonethe Cu-catalyzed transannulation showed a strong preference for the alkyne over the nitrile group. Thus, the reaction of pyridotriazole1awith 5-hexynenitrile furnished indolizine3rwith the nitrile group staying intact (entry 18). Notably, pyridotriazoles which did not contain electron withdrawing groups at the C-3 position were found to be reactive substrates as well. Hence, the indolizines derived from 3-phenyl and 3-methyl pyridotriazoles were produced in reasonable yields (entries 19-23). Remarkably, even a non-substituted pyridotriazole (R1= H) reacted with phenylacetylene to form indolizine3xin a moderate yield. Noteworthily, trialkylsilyl-substituted alkynes were either unstable (TMS, TES) or stayed intact (TIPS) under the reaction conditions. NoneIsolated yields. We envisioned two alternative pathways for this Cu-catalyzed transannulation reaction (Scheme 2). First, the copper catalyst can react with the terminal alkyne2to form copper acetylide4, which would react with the alpha-imino diazo compoundAto generate the Cu-carbene complexC(patha). Alternatively, the copper-carbeneCcan be formedviathe reaction of alkyne2with copper-carbeneB, which is produced from the diazo compoundAand the Cu-catalyst (pathb). Next, migratory insertion of the alkynyl group at the carbene C-atom ofCwould form the propargyl intermediateD. 13The latter would undergo cyclizationviaa nucleophilic attack of the pyridine nitrogen at the triple bond activated by the electrophilic Cu-species14to produce the triazolyl-copper intermediateG. Also, one cannot exclude the formation of propargylic (E) or allenic (F) intermediates upon protiodemetalation ofD. Cycloisomerization ofEandFwould form intermediateG. 15A subsequent protiodemetalation ofGwould lead to the indolizine3. In order to verify a potential involvement of Cu-acetylide4in this transformation, we performed several test experiments. First, it was found that the reaction of pyridotriazole1awith4did not produce indolizine3a(Scheme 3, entry 1). However, the reaction of1awith4can be catalyzed by both Cu(MeCN)4PF6(entry 2)16and HPF6(aq.) (entry 3). This observation suggests that the presence of an electrophilic Cu-species is required to activate the alkyne during the cyclization ofDintoG,17,18and potentially to shift the equilibrium of the pyridotriazole towards the reactive alpha-imino diazo compoundA. 19Although more detailed studies are required to elucidate the exact mechanism of this transformation, based on literature data20,21and the above-mentioned observations, it is believed that the reaction most likely proceedsviapatha(Scheme 2). We have developed a practical and efficient copper-catalyzed denitrogenative transannulation reaction of pyridotriazoles with terminal alkynes into indolizines. Compared to the known Rh-catalyzed transannulation reaction, this newly developed method features not only the use of a cheap Cu-catalyst and aerobic conditions, but also a much broader scope of multisubstituted indolizines that now can be accessed from unactivated pyridotriazoles and diverse terminal alkynes. Click here for additional data file.