Gymnastics is known as one of the most high-risk sports in the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA), as extreme stresses may occur during characteristic maneuvers of the sport. NoneCurrently, there are 17 men's gymnastics programs and 82 women's gymnastics programs in the NCAA. The anatomic regions particularly affected by injury vary by sex, most likely because of the diverse events in which male and female gymnasts compete. None,None,NoneAnkle sprains are a particular concern. The purpose of the current study was to describe the pattern of injuries for the men's and women's gymnastics teams over 10 seasons at a single Division 1 institution. Additionally, we aimed to investigate injuries according to sex, body part, severity, year of eligibility, team activity, as well as the surgical procedures performed during this 10-year period. This study received approval from the University of Iowa's Institutional Review Board. A retrospective review was conducted of athletic training room injury reports and physician records for the men's and women's gymnastics collegiate teams competing between August 1, 2001 and July 31, 2011. These injuries were documented into the Sports Injury Monitoring System (SIMS; FlanTech) by members of the athletic training staff. Methodology in utilizing this database for epidemiologic studies has been previously described. None,None,NoneSIMS allows athletic training staff to efficiently record injuries, treatments, and physician visits among other information. Data from the SIMS database was used for analysis of all male and female gymnasts for 10 consecutive seasons beginning August 1, 2001 to July 31, 2011. The recorded injuries during this time found in SIMS were reviewed for inclusion or exclusion. Statistical analysis was performed using Microsoft Excel (Microsoft Corp); and injury rates, 95% confidence intervals, risk ratios, and risk calculations were performed. NoneFrom 2001 to 2011, a total of 119 gymnasts competed for the men's and women's gymnastics teams. A full description of the injuries sustained is available inTables 1through5. Total number of gymnasts, number of injuries, athletic exposures, and injury rates (incidence) between groupsNoneAn athletic exposure was defined as 1 athlete participating in 1 game or practice. NoneRate ratio compares injury rates between men and women. Graphical representation of body part injuredNoneAE, athlete-exposure. Male, female, and total gymnasts' injuries suffered stratified by participation yearNoneRisk % represents the epidemiologic injury proportion, calculated by number of injured athletes/number of athletes on the team during the season. Injury rate is defined by total injuries/athlete-exposure. Severity of injuries suffered by gymnasts stratified by sexNoneInjury rate is reported in total number of injuries divided by athlete-exposures. The rates for injury are reported per 1000 exposures. Risk ratios compare the incidence of injury between male and female gymnasts, calculated as female injury rate/male injury rate. Injuries suffered as a factor of team activityOf all injuries sustained by both male and female gymnasts, 56% resulted in time loss. The proportion of injuries suffered by male gymnasts that resulted in missed time was 123 of 240 injuries (52.3%). During this time, 19 males underwent a total of 22 surgical procedures. The majority of these procedures addressed upper extremity pathology (55%). For female gymnasts, 126 of 201 (62.7%) injuries resulted in time loss. During this time, 29 females underwent a total of 49 surgical procedures; 80% of these procedures addressed pathology in the lower extremity (hip, knee/leg, and ankle/foot) (Table 5). A complete listing of all surgical procedures is provided in the appendix (available athttp://sph.sagepub.com/content/suppl). Our study demonstrates similar injury rates overall between male and female gymnasts. This contradicts prior reports where women were found to be injured 4 times more often than men in intercollegiate gymnastics. NoneThis discrepancy may have been because of inadequate sampling. Lanese et alNonereported increased injuries in female gymnasts; however, their study was limited to a single season of participation. Females were found to suffer significantly more injuries resulting in missed participation time compared with men, and were twice as likely to undergo surgical management. Injuries were more prevalent in patients of younger eligibility overall. In our study, men suffered significantly more injuries to the hand and wrist when compared with women. This may be, in part, representative of the different events male and female gymnasts participate in. Specifically, the high bar is associated with significant hand and wrist injuries in male gymnasts. None,NoneAlso, the pommel horse event may predispose athletes to hand and wrist injuries; this event is exclusively male. Female gymnasts suffer a significant number of injuries to the foot and ankle. This is consistent with other reports in the literature. None,NoneIn a study by Marshall et al,Nonewomen were most commonly injured on the floor exercise (31%) and vault (27%). Female gymnasts participate in balance beam, which may subject athletes to higher rates of lower extremity injury. NoneCaine et alNonereported that 23.1% of injuries to female gymnasts occurred while participating in balance beam. This is consistent with epidemiologic studies in other sports. NoneInterestingly, this trend was stronger in men than women. Senior-eligible women actually displayed the highest rate of injury, although this may be because of the low relative number of senior athletes competing in gymnastics. Also, female gymnasts are generally considered to peak competitively at a much younger age of 16 to 18 years than male gymnasts, who theoretically peak in their early 20s. Surgical intervention often results in the athlete missing the rest of that season. Along these lines, our findings would be consistent with a study by Lanese et alNonecomparing injuries in men's and women's intercollegiate sports, who found female gymnasts suffered a higher percentage of season-ending injuries when compared with male athletes. This study has limitations that merit mention. First, this epidemiologic study evaluated data from 1 collegiate team over the course of 10 seasons, and therefore may lack generalizability. In addition, although our research illustrates the number of injuries that resulted in time loss, we were unable to determine exactly how much time was lost with a number of cases. Therefore, we cannot present an average time loss per injury. Also, the database used characterized injuries by general categories (eg, leg and ankle injuries were combined), and specific breakdown by body part or type of injury was not readily available. Last, we were unable to accurately determine the events the gymnasts competed in (ie, uneven bars, floor, vault, rings) or on which event they were injured. Overall, injury rates were similar between male and female gymnasts in our study (8.78 per 1000 athlete-exposures for men and 9.37 per 1000 athlete-exposures for women; rate ratio, 1.07; 95% CI, 0.89-1.29). Women, in general, suffered significantly more severe injuries and more frequently underwent operative management. The incidence of upper extremity injury was higher in men and lower extremity injuries were more common in women. Injuries were more common in freshman-eligible athletes. This information leads us to believe that special attention should be given to gymnasts transitioning into collegiate-level gymnastics and to female gymnasts as they progress throughout their college years. Training regimen adjustment and close assessment of freshmen athletes for signs of overuse injury may decrease injury occurrence and time loss resulting from injury. The data suggest that injury prevention strategies should focus on the ankle and foot as well as the elbow, wrist, and hand.