While current therapies of insulin treatment afford glycemic control to patients with type 1 diabetes (T1D), these relatively static methods do not completely recapitulate the acute regulation of the endogenous islet beta-cells destroyed by autoimmune destruction. Consequently, patients with T1D have a dramatically shortened life expectancy due to serious long-term diabetes complications, including coronary and renal disease. A variety of innovative approaches are being explored to produce beta-cells from embryonic stem cells (1,2) and adult cell types (3-5). A supposition in these efforts involves producing conditions that correctly regulate the transcription factor networks required in programming pancreatic progenitor cells into beta-cells and subsequently controlling mature islet cell function. These include transcription factors like Pdx1 (6-10), which is essential in the formation of early pancreatic epithelium, developing beta-cells and adult islet beta-cells, as well as neurogenin 3 (Ngn3) (11-13), which is required during embryogenesis for specification of all islet cell types (i.e., beta-cells, glucagon hormone-producing alpha-cells, somatostatin delta-cells, pancreatic polypeptide (PP) cells, and ghrelin epsilon-cells). In addition, there are transcription factors like Mafa (14,15) that are influential later during postnatal beta-cell maturation and adult cell function. Indeed, ectopic expression of Pdx1, Ngn3, and Mafa can reprogram pancreatic exocrine cells (3) and intestinal cells (4) into functional beta-like cells in vivo. T1D results from the specific loss of islet beta-cells. Interestingly, functional beta-like cells are produced from endogenous mouse islet alpha-cells (16) or delta-cells (17) after near total targeted destruction of this cell population, a model mimicking the disease state (16). Furthermore, epigenomic findings suggest that human alpha-cells are poised for reprogramming, with treatment to prevent histone 3 repressor site marking at lysine 27 leading to the appearance of insulin-positive-glucagon-positive bihormonal cells in human islets (18). Here, we generated transgenic mice that allow conditionally and targeted expression of Mafa or Pdx1 to determine their contribution to beta-cell generation from embryonic endocrine Ngn3-positive and committed glucagon-positive progenitors. Earlier studies had established that forced Pdx1 expression in this endocrine precursor population results in greater beta-cell production at the expense of alpha-cells, with no effect on delta-cells or PP cells (19). We found that Mafa not only was found to potentiate the ability of Pdx1 to reprogram Ngn3-positive endocrine progenitor cells to insulin-positive cells but also empowered Pdx1 to transdifferentiate committed glucagon-positive alpha-cells to this cell fate. These results provide further support for the essential role of Mafa and Pdx1 in the production of therapeutic beta-cells for treatment of patients with T1D. CAG-CAT-MafaNone(20),CAG-CAT-Pdx1None(21),Ngn3-Cre(12),Gcg-Cre(22),ROSA26-LacZ(23), andROSA26-GFP(24) mice have previously been described. All animal procedures were approved by the Ethics Review Committee for Animal Experimentation of the Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine. Pancreata were dissected and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS at 4 degrees C, washed in PBS, immersed in sucrose solution, embedded and frozen in Tissue-Tek (O.C.T. Compound; Sakura), or processed routinely for paraffin embedding. Frozen and paraffin blocks were sectioned at 6-mum thickness and immunostained. The following primary antibodies were used at the given dilutions: rabbit anti-MafA (1:500) (Bethyl Laboratories, Inc., Montgomery, TX); goat anti-MafA (25) (1:200); rabbit anti-Pdx1 (26) (1:1,000); rabbit anti-Nkx6.1 (1:200) (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO); rabbit anti-MafB (1:200) (Bethyl Laboratories, Inc.); goat anti-Arx (1:200) (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc., Dallas, TX); rabbit anti-myc (1:200) (Cell Signaling Technology, Inc., Danvers, MA); rabbit anti-flag (1:100) (Affinity BioReagents, Golden, CO); mouse anti-flag (1:500) (TransGenic Inc., Kobe, Japan); rabbit anti-Glut2 (1:200) (abcam, Cambridge, U.K.); guinea pig anti-insulin (1:2,000) (DAKO, Glostrup, Denmark); rabbit anti-glucagon (1:500) (DAKO); guinea pig anti-glucagon (1:200) (Millipore, St. Charles, MO); rabbit anti-beta-galactosidase (beta-gal) antibody (1:200) (Medical and Biological Laboratories, Nagoya, Japan); chicken anti-beta-gal antibody (1:200) (abcam); and chicken anti-green fluorescent protein (GFP) antibody (1:500) (abcam). Primary antibodies were detected with donkey-raised secondary antibody-conjugated fluorescein at a 1:500 dilution. Fluorescent images were captured using an Olympus FV1000-D confocal microscope. The images shown are representative of our analysis of at least three independently derived mice unless otherwise specified. The total number of insulin-, glucagon-, PP-, and beta-gal-positive cells in five sections per pancreas from at least three mice per genotype were manually counted in theNgn3-Cre(Figs. 1Noneand2None) andGcg-Cre(Fig. 3None) lines. Approximately 500 cells were counted in the 6-week-old pancreas and 200 cells in the P0.5 pancreas. The data are presented as the ratio of each hormone-positive cell or hormone-positive-to-beta-gal-positive cell for each genotype. Mafa and Pdx1 enhance production of insulin-positive cells from glucagon-positive cells when coexpressed in pancreatic endocrine precursor cells. A: Schematic representation of Mafamyc, Pdx1flag, and Cre-mediated recombination. Exogenous myc-tagged Mafa or flag-tagged Pdx1 is expressed via the excision of the stuffer chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) cassette upon production in islet cell precursors ofNgn3-Creor ofGcg-Crein islet alpha-cells. B: MafA and Pdx1 antibodies were used to show ectopically expressed Mafamycand Pdx1flagin essentially allNgn3-Cre;CAT-Mafa(left) orNgn3-Cre;CAT-Pdx1(right) islet glucagon-positive cells at P0.5. The arrows illustrate Mafa or Pdx1 expressing glucagon-positive cells. C: Insulin-positive and glucagon-positive cells in representative islets of theNgn3-Cre,Ngn3-Cre;CAT-Mafa, Ngn3-Cre;CAT-Pdx1, andNgn3-Cre;CAT-Mafa;CAT-Pdx1pancreas at P0.5 or 6 weeks. The arrows depict insulin and glucagon-copositive cells, which are only detected in theNgn3-Cre;CAT-Mafa;CAT-Pdx1pancreas at P0.5. D: Quantitative analysis of the islet insulin-, glucagon-, or cohormone-positive production at P0.5 and 6-week-old cells in theNgn3-Cre,Ngn3-Cre;CAT-Mafa,Ngn3-Cre;CAT-Pdx1, andNgn3-Cre;CAT-Mafa;CAT-Pdx1pancreas. The ratio of the insulin-, glucagon-, or double-positive cells is presented relative to the total hormone-positive cell number. The ratio of the double hormone-positive cells to glucagon-positive cells was compared at P0.5 and of glucagon-positive cells to insulin-positive cells at 6 weeks. n= 3-6. 6W, six weeks; CAG, chicken beta-actin promoter and cytomegalovirus enhancer; INS, insulin. *P less than 0.001. Scale bars: 50 mum. Insulin-positive cells are produced from PP cells upon coexpression of Mafa and Pdx1 in pancreatic endocrine precursor cells. A: Immunohistochemical analysis of pancreata fromNgn3-Cre, Ngn3-Cre;CAT-Mafa, Ngn3-Cre;CAT-Pdx1, andNgn3-Cre;CAT-Mafa;CAT-Pdx1mice at P0.5 and 6 weeks for insulin, PP, and somatostatin (Sst). Nuclei were stained with DAPI. There were PP cells coexpressing PP and insulin at P0.5 and 6 weeks. Arrows depict insulin and PP-copositive cells. Scale bars: 50 mum. B: The ratio of insulin and somatostatin-positive cells to somatostatin-positive cells was compared at P0.5; the somatostatin-positive cell-to-insulin-positive cell ratio was compared at 6 weeks. n= 3-6. 6W, 6 weeks; INS, insulin. *P less than 0.001. Mafa + Pdx1 produces insulin-positive cells from alpha-cells. Insulin, glucagon, and beta-gal staining was performed in theGcg-Cre;CAT-Mafa;ROSA-LacZ(A),Gcg-Cre;CAT-Pdx1;ROSA-LacZ(B), andGcg-Cre;CAT-Mafa;CAT-Pdx1;ROSA-LacZ(C) pancreas. The arrows inAandBillustrate thatGcg-CreactivatesROSA-LacZreporter expression in only alpha-cells. BecauseGcg-Crewas expressed in only ?35% of alpha-cells, a nonrepresentative islet image is shown to more clearly illustrate the extent of glucagon-positive-to-insulin-positive cell conversion inGcg-Cre;CAT-Mafa;CAT-Pdx1;ROSA-LacZislets. The arrows show that a large fraction of beta-gal-positive cells express insulin by 2 weeks in theGcg-Cre;CAT-Mafa;CAT-Pdx1;ROSA-LacZpancreas (C). D: The ratio of insulin-positive, glucagon-positive, and insulin + glucagon-positive cells within beta-gal-positive cells to total beta-gal-positive cells at 2 weeks inGcg-Cre;ROSA-LacZ, Gcg-Cre;CAT-Mafa;ROSA-LacZ, Gcg-Cre;CAT-Pdx1;ROSA-LacZ,andGcg-Cre;CAT-Mafa;CAT-Pdx1;ROSA-LacZis displayed, and the ratio of insulin-positive cells is compared. n= 4. 2W, 2 weeks; INS, insulin. *P less than 0.001. Scale bars: 50 mum. Statistical analysis was performed using one-way ANOVA followed by the Fisher test. A value ofP less than 0.05 was considered to be statistically significant. To explore how Mafa influences the ability of Pdx1 to convert alpha-cells into beta-cells, we developed mouse lines that allow for conditional and heritably overproduction of either Mafa, Pdx1, or Mafa + Pdx1 upon expression of Cre recombinase (Fig. 1None). Antibodies to Mafa and Pdx1 and their incorporated antigenic tags were used to immunohistochemically detect the levels of the transgenic proteins, termed Mafamycand Pdx1flag. Both of these islet beta-cell-enriched proteins (27-29) were now found throughout the islet cell population upon activation in embryonic endocrine precursors withNgn3-driven Cre, which were termed theNgn3-Cre;CAT-MafaandNgn3-Cre;CAT-Pdx1lines. For example, flag-tagged Pdx1 was produced in essentially all islet cells in P0.5 and 6-week-oldNgn3-Cre;CAT-Pdx1mice; the penetrance rate was ?95% in the insulin-positive and glucagon-positive cell populations (Supplementary Fig. 1). Notably, neither Mafamycnor Pdx1flagwas expressed in the surrounding acinar or ductal cells of the pancreas (Fig. 1None). While there was no overt effect on alpha-cell fate inNgn3-Cre;CAT-Mafaislets (Fig. 1NoneandNone), insulin was expressed in ?10% ofNgn3-Cre;CAT-Pdx1glucagon-positive cells at P0.5. These double hormone-positive cells resolved to become only insulin-positive by 6 weeks, with essentially no islet glucagon-positive cells remaining (Fig. 1None), as previously reported (19). Moreover, there was no evidence for apoptosis within Mafamyc- and Pdx1flag-positive islet glucagon-positive or insulin-positive cells, with the TUNEL-positive signal detected exclusively from red blood cells (Supplementary Fig. 2). These results suggested that resolution of the Mafamyc+ Pdx1flag-positive cells to monohormonal insulin production reflects transdifferentiation of alpha- to beta-like cells. Mafa expression in endocrine precursor cells augmented the actions of Pdx1 in theNgn3-Cre;CAT-Mafa;CAT-Pdx1line. Thus, there was a roughly ninefold increase in the number of insulin and glucagon-copositive cells in these islets at birth compared withNgn3-Cre;CAT-Pdx1islets (17.9 vs. 2.0%) (Fig. 1None). Insulin was also clearly detected inNgn3-Cre;CAT-Mafa;CAT-Pdx1PP cells at P0.5, while no induction was found inNgn3-Cre;CAT-MafaorNgn3-Cre;CAT-Pdx1islets (Fig. 2NoneandSupplementary Fig. 3None). Notably, insulin and PP-copositive cells were still detectible in 6-week-oldNgn3-Cre;CAT-Mafa;CAT-Pdx1islets (Fig. 2None). In addition and as reported earlier, insulin was produced in very few somatostatin hormone-expressingNgn3-Cre;CAT-Pdx1islet delta-cells (19) orNgn3-Cre;CAT-Mafa;CAT-Pdx1islet delta-cells (Supplementary Fig. 3). These results are consistent with lineage-tracing experiments indicating that islet beta- and PP cells are derived from a common PP-positive precursor (22) and illustrate the differential plasticity of islet lineages to Mafa and Pdx1 reprogramming. Pdx1 alone is incapable of converting alpha-cells into islet beta-cells in vivo (19). However, since cosynthesized Mafa + Pdx1 favored the production of beta-cells at the expense of alpha-cells when coproduced in Ngn3-positive progenitors (Fig. 1None), we wondered whether these factors would have such facilitating properties if exclusively expressed in alpha-cells. Glucagonenhancer/promoter-drivenCretransgenic mice (30) (Gcg-Cre) were used to overexpress Mafa, Pdx1, and Mafa + Pdx1 in alpha-cells, with concomitant excision of theloxPsite flankedLacZor GFP expression cassettes in theROSA26locus used for cell lineage labeling. Cre-mediated recombination was observed in roughly 35% of islet glucagon-positive cells inGcg-Cre;CAT-Mafa(Fig. 3None) andGcg-Cre;CAT-Pdx1(Fig. 3None) islets. Moreover, insulin, somatostatin-positive, and PP-positive cells were not beta-gal positive (Supplementary Fig. 4) (data not shown). The effect on islet insulin-positive cell formation of forced Mafa + Pdx1 expression in alpha-cells was compared amongGcg-Cre;CAT-Mafa;CAT-Pdx1,Gcg-Cre;CAT-Mafa, andGcg-Cre;CAT-Pdx1islets. Neither Mafa nor Pdx1 could independently produce insulin in alpha-cells (Fig. 3NoneandNone), a result consistent with earlier data examining forced Pdx1 expression (19). In contrast, insulin staining was clearly detectable inGcg-Cre;CAT-Mafa;CAT-Pdx1alpha-cells marked by beta-gal, myc tag, and flag tag by 2 weeks; the analysis was performed at this time point rather than P0.5 owing to the later developmental expression ofGcg-Crerelative toNgn3-Cre. Notably, glucagon was no longer detectible in the 2-week-old lineage-labeled insulin-positive cell population (Fig. 3NoneandNoneandSupplementary Fig. 5NoneandNone), and there was not any overt change in number of these cells in 6-week-oldGcg-Cre;CAT-Mafa;CAT-Pdx1islets (Supplementary Fig. 6) (data not shown). As observed in the insulin-positive cell population generated by Mafamycand Pdx1flagexpression in Ngn3 islet progenitors, there was no evidence of cell death withinGcg-Cre;CAT-Mafa;CAT-Pdx1islets (Supplementary Figs. 2 and 7). The remaining glucagon-positive cells inGcg-Cre;CAT-Mafa;CAT-Pdx1islets never expressed Mafamycor Pdx1flag-a reflection of the poor penetrance ofGcg-Cre(Supplementary Fig. 8). For further assessment of the change to beta-cell identity of the alpha-cells made to coexpress Mafa and Pdx1, immunostaining was performed with various islet alpha-cell- (i.e., Mafb and Arx) and beta-cell- (i.e., Glut2, Nkx6.1, and Urocortin3 [Ucn3] [31]) enriched protein antibodies on this new insulin-positive cell population (Fig. 4andSupplementary Fig. 9). Significantly, many of the beta-cell-enriched products were made in these cells, including the principal beta-cell glucose transporter, Glut2 (i.e., 80% of GFP-traced recombinated cells), the Nkx6.1 transcription factor (36% of beta-gal-traced recombinated cells), and Ucn3 (46% of Flag-traced recombinated cells). In contrast, Mafb (27), a transcription factor normally produced in immature islet beta-cells (15), was not present in Mafamyc+ Pdx1flag-produced insulin-positive cells (Fig. 4None). Similarly, Arx (32), a transcription factor essential for alpha-cell formation (32), was expressed poorly in alpha-cell-derived insulin-positive cells (i.e., ?21%) (Supplementary Fig. 9None). Taken together, these findings demonstrate that Pdx1 + Mafa can transdifferentiate alpha-cells into beta-like cells by inducing key features of the beta-cell and suppressing those of the alpha-cell. Islet beta-cell identity marker expression is gained at the expense of alpha inGcg-Cre;CAT-Mafa;CAT-Pdx1islets. Islet beta-cell-enriched Glut2 (A) and Nkx6.1 (B) production is specifically induced inGcg-Cre;CAT-Mafa;CAT-Pdx1;ROSAalpha-cell lineage-labeled GFP (A) and beta-gal (B) cells at the rate of 80% and 36% among labeled cells, respectively. In contrast, the production of alpha-cell identity (C) Mafb is lost in this alpha-lineage-marked cell population. The arrows illustrate Glut2-positive, Nkx6.1-positive, or Mafb-negative cells labeled with the lineage marker and presumably expressing Mafamycand/or Pdx1flag. 2W, 2 weeks; INS, insulin. Scale bars: 50 mum. Several distinct islet-enriched transcription factors are capable of reprogramming other pancreatic cell types into beta-like cells, including Pdx1, Ngn3, and Mafa in exocrine acinar cells (3); Pdx1 (19) as well as Nkx6.1 in Ngn3-positive precursors (33); and Pax4 in ductal cells (34). Such observations illustrate the tremendous cellular plasticity within the pancreas that could be exploited therapeutically to sustain islet beta-cell activity in patients with T1D. Interestingly, islet alpha-cells, the principal remaining pancreatic islet cell population in these individuals, convert to beta-cells upon ablation of this insulin-positive cell population in adult mice. However, little is known about the factors that initiate this cell fate change. Here we show that islet beta-cell-enriched Mafa not only potentiates the ability of Pdx1 to convert Ngn3-positive cells to insulin-positive cells but also permits Pdx1 to reprogram alpha-cells into beta-cells. These findings illustrate the mutually supportive abilities of these transcription factors to promote the beta-cell fate choice. Heritably expressing Mafa and Pdx1 into Ngn3-positive cells profoundly impacted the fraction of alpha-cells converted to insulin and glucagon-coproducing cells at birth, with essentially all alpha-cells undergoing a cell fate switch inNgn3-Cre;CAT-Mafa;CAT-Pdx1islets (Fig. 1None). This population appears to be completely reprogrammed to beta-cells by 6 weeks inNgn3-Cre;CAT-Pdx1(19) andNgn3-Cre;CAT-Mafa;CAT-Pdx1islets (Fig. 1None), as illustrated by the gain in beta-cell identity marker expression and loss of alpha (Fig. 4andSupplementary Fig. 9). The significant enhancement by Mafa of Pdx1-mediated transdifferentiation at postnatal 0.5 day (P0.5) implies that both factors act simultaneously to change the chromatin architecture of alpha-cell progenitors to a beta-like fate. In addition, Mafa + Pdx1 induced insulin production in islet PP cells and silenced PP hormone expression (Fig. 2None). Unfortunately, the lack of distinctive maturation markers for PP cell markers precludes us from determining the extent of reprogramming. Notably, while Nkx6.1 also effectively converts Ngn3-positive progenitors to insulin-positive cells, there are clear difference in how this transcription factor acts in relation to Mafa + Pdx1. For example, Nkx6.1 reprogrammed all neonatal islet cell types to express the insulin hormone (i.e., alpha, delta, epsilon, and PP) and not simply the alpha- and PP cells (33). However, developmental Nkx6.1 expression is also unable to effectively convert alpha-cell progenitors to insulin producing, and it would be of interest to determine whether Mafa has the same enabling capabilities. Even more profound mechanistic differences were observed upon expression of Pax4 in embryonic Ngn3-positive cells or alpha-cells (34), which produced beta-like cells from pancreatic ductal cells that resulted in oversized islets, beta-cell dysfunction, and diabetes. Each of these reprogramming factors presumably initiates the beta-cell-fate switch by binding to target sequences in silent chromatin (35). The differences in their potential presumably reflect their ability to embed in nucleosomal DNA and the functional properties of recruited coregulators, as illustrated for the Oct4, Sox2, Klf4, and c-Myc transcription in generating pluripotent stem cells (36). Gene induction involves the recruitment of transcriptional coregulators by enhancer-bound transcription factors like Mafa and Pdx1. These protein-protein interactions ultimately lead to assembly at the promoter of the RNA polymerase II transcriptional machinery. Coregulators can have positive (coactivator) and/or negative (corepressor) actions on target gene transcription, thus conferring a second level of specificity to the transcriptional response. For example, the islet-cell-enriched Nkx2.2 transcription recruits the DNMT3a, Grg3, and HDAC1 corepressors to silence transcription of theArxgene in developing beta-cells (37). It will be interesting to determine how various recently described coactivators of Pdx1 and Mafa impact their reprogramming abilities, as one would predict that the chromatin-modifying activities of Swi/Snf4 (i.e., Pdx1 [38]) and MLL4 (i.e., Mafa [39]) to be of importance. Collectively, these results strongly suggest that Pdx1 and Mafa are principal mediators of beta-cell production from non-beta-cells, including in the context of developing alpha-cells as well as adult acinar (3), stomach (5), and intestinal (4) cells. In consideration of these observations, we predict that these transcription factors also play a principal role in the induction of the newly formed beta-cells produced from alpha- (16) and delta- (17) cells after almost complete ablation of the islet beta-cell population by diphtheria toxin expression. Importantly, islet alpha-, PP, and delta-cells appear to be preserved in the context of the depleted beta-cell mass in patients with T1D (40-42) and T2D (43,44) and, consequently, are potentially reprogrammable by transcription factor expression (e.g., Mafa + Pdx1, Pax4 [34]) or drug treatment (18). Collectively, these findings further illuminate the significance of understanding the mechanisms involved in regulating islet cell identity and function in diabetes treatment.