Solution standards of polonium isotopes have been and are important in a variety of applied measurement disciplines. At present, they are primarily of interest because of their use as calibration standards for alpha-emission rate measurements, and as low-level tracers and separation yield monitors in radiochemical procedures that are employed with environmental and geophysical samples. For many years, preceding the past one or two decades,210Po was unquestionably the polonium isotope most widely used in nuclear physics and radiochemistry research [1]. The reasons for this past popularity are evident: it could be prepared relatively easily and with virtually no radionuclidic impurities by (d,n) reactions on natural monoisotopic209Bi, although historically it most often has been obtained by extraction from very aged natural samples containing progenitors in the primordial238U series; its half-life (138 d) is neither inconveniently too short nor too long for use in many physical and chemical studies; it has no intervening radioactive daughter products, decaying directly to stable206Pb; and its decay is by 100 % monoenergetic alpha emission. Over the years, however, its popularity has somewhat waned because of the advantages inherent in having longer-lived standards for use within applied-measurement laboratories. More recently, in 1984, the National Bureau of Standards (NBS), now NIST, prepared, calibrated and disseminated carrier-free208Po solution standards. These longer-lived208Po standards (2.9 yr half-life) were issued as NIST Standard Reference Material SRM 4327. They consisted of approximately 1.1 g of 1 mol . L-1hydrochloric acid (HCl) contained in 2 mL flame-sealed borosilicate-glass ampoules, and were certified to contain a208Po activity concentration of (76.6 +/-1.1) Bq . g-1on 20 June, 1984 [2]. The above cited uncertainty interval corresponds to a combined standard uncertainty multiplied by a coverage factor ofk=3. The solutions contained a small quantity of contaminant209Po with a209Po to208Po impurity ratio of 0.0065 +/- 0.0026 at the reference time. The impurity ratio, of course, worsened with increasing age of the standard. These SRMs had a great demand from laboratories throughout the world and the initial supply of several hundred sources was exhausted within a few years. Since the initial issuance of the SRM 4327208Po standards, considerable interest was expressed for having available similar standards of the even longer-lived 102 yr209Po. In addition to the longer half-life, standards of the209Po isotope also have the advantage of being capable of being prepared in a very pure state by209Bi(p,n) reactions. Furthermore, the impurity ratios for any slight traces of the shorter-lived208Po or210Po impurities will of necessity improve with time. The present work to prepare and calibrate a new series of209Po solution standards follows a preceding companion study by Colle [3] in which he investigated the long-term stability of very dilute, aged solutions of polonium. Prior to this earlier study, the integrity of polonium solutions stored over a decade or so was largely unknown. Considering the complex and often-perplexing chemistry of polonium [4-6], the previous study was considered to be advisable prior to issuing any further polonium standards, such as that for209Po described herein. The initial experimental design for the preparation and calibration of the standards was found to require considerable subsequent modification. The original design is outlined in the schema ofFig. 1. This design was followed, but, because of some difficulties and inexplicable early findings in the liquid scintillation (LS) measurements, a number of additional independent LS calibrations were also performed. As indicated inFig. 1, the209Po stock solution was transferred to a larger vessel (solution A) from which two LS samples were prepared. These solution A samples were intended to be used to obtain an approximate assay of the209Po content prior to proceeding with the remaining scheme. Based on the findings of this assay, solution A could then be appropriately diluted to the starting point of solution B. Four sets of counting sources that were to be used for the primary calibration were gravimetrically prepared from solution B. The sources consisted of two sets of LS samples with two different quench conditions; three evaporated solid sources for use in alpha-emission impurity analyses and for confirmatory measurements by 2pialpha counting; and three evaporated solid sources for use in photonemission impurity analyses. A master dispensing solution (M) was also prepared by a careful gravimetric dilution of solution B. Approximately 200 ampoules of the209Po standard were prepared from the master solution M. Four randomly selected ampoules were then used to prepare 4 sets of LS samples to estimate between-ampoule variability. It was envisaged that the activity concentration of the209Po in the ampoule standards would be obtained from 4pialpha LS measurements on the solution B samples after applying the known gravimetric dilution factor to the assay results. Samples B1 through B3 were minimally quenched, and samples B4 through B6 were intended to be matched to the quench conditions of the M samples (seeFig. 1). Comparison of the LS results for the matched B and M samples would therefore verify the dilution factor. Confirmatory measurements were also performed by 2pialpha gas-flow proportional counting of the evaporated solid sources L1 through L3. From the onset, it was considered that these solid source measurements would at best only serve as less accurate, but independent confirmations of the LS results. In contradistinction, the 1984 calibration of the previous208Po standards [2] was based on defined-geometry alpha-particle scintillation counting of evaporated sources, and used LS counting as an independent confirmatory measurement method. This difference in the respective calibration approaches reflects, in part, the improvements in conventional LS standardization techniques over the past decade. Absolute standardizations of pure alpha-emitting radionuclides by 4pialpha LS measurements are relatively straightforward. 1It was assumed, mistakenly, that this would be the case for this calibration. The LS detection efficiency for a particles is virtually 100 % and independent of reasonable sample quenching conditions. Therefore, it was assumed that a calibration could be obtained by merely measuring and integrating the full-energy LS spectra for the209Po samples with appropriate corrections for background subtractions, for extrapolations of the spectra to zero energy, for the presence of any impurities, and for decay of the209Po and any known impurities. The corrected LS count rate as a function of sample mass can also be extrapolated to zero sample mass (as a kind of quench correction), but this is seldom necessary with a emitters since the sample mass dependency is usually found to be completely invariant of quench conditions. Lastly, it was recognized that the LS calibration would require a correction for the small (IEC= 0.0048 +/- 0.0004) electron capture branch decay of209Po (refer toFig. 2). The results of LS measurements based on the above described protocol evidenced a number of anomalies. First, all of the LS samples were measured with two different LS counting systems, and the two sets of corrected results exhibited substantial systematic differences. Depending on the specific sample in question, the differences in LS response between the two LS instruments ranged from about 0.5 % to several percent. This result would suggest a difference in discrimination level or detection threshold for the two LS systems. Yet, this should not have been important for a nearly pure alpha emitter like209Po. Such an instrument-dependent discrepancy had not been observed previously with other radionuclides, including beta-emitters like36C1 where the effect could be expected to be more pronounced [10]. Second, the magnitude of the differences between the two instruments for a given sample appeared to be temporally dependent - i.e., dependent on the time of sample measurement. This, of course, suggested the possibility of the detection efficiency (and or quenching) changing with time. Again, this should not have been important for209Po with an expected nearly quench-independent LS response. Third, early LS samples prepared from solutions A and B exhibited very rapid changes in instrument quench indicating parameters. This too should not have affected the LS a detection efficiency. Fourth, the dilution factors obtained from comparison of the LS results with the solution B and M samples (using only the results from a single instrument) were not in as good agreement with the gravimetrically-determined dilution factor as that expected. The LS-determined dilution factors (for either instrument) differed from the gravimetrically-determined one by a few tenths of a percent. The observed range of differences was of course due to the temporal variations noted above. Typically, for a single dilution, such dilution factor verifications differ by less than a few hundredths of a percent. Fifth, and lastly, the LS spectra contained some structural details that were not understood or expected. The magnitude of some of the observed differences and effects could not be accounted for by any known non-alpha decay mode in209Po, such as that from electron-capture branching. Considering that these seeming measurement discrepancies were not experienced in many previous LS standardizations by this laboratory, the causative culprit was initially suspected to be either some peculiarity of polonium chemistry, some type of LS cocktail instability, or some combination of the two. In an attempt to understand and reconcile the above observed discrepancies, a considerable number of additional LS samples were prepared for further investigations. In large measure, this further work involved a systematic study of the LS responses and spectral details as a function of different sample compositions and quenching conditions. The initial phases of the work was conducted in the period of March through June 1993 followed by an eight-month abeyance. Further systematic studies were continued and finally concluded in the period between February and April 1994. The cause of the initially discrepant LS results was finally understood during the 1994 period. It was deduced that they were not measurement discrepanciesper se, but rather were a result of the initially chosen analysis method which was inappropriate when applied to the measurement of209Po. The problem arose from an inherent, but unknown aspect of209Po decay: a sufficiently long, delayed isomeric state in205Pb. A partial decay scheme, based on the recent critical evaluation by Martin [11], is shown inFig. 2. As indicated, the relative alpha branching to the two lowest energy levels in205Pb is largely unknown. Neither of the two most complete studies of209Po alpha decay [12,13] could resolve differences in an a transition to the205Pb ground state (Nonepi= 5/2-) or to the 2.3 keV (Jpi= 1/2-) first excited state. The energy of the principal a branch (Ealpha= 4.883 MeV) measured in these studies is assumed to correspond to the branch to the 2.3 keV level. The alpha transition to the ground state is thus 2 keV larger, i.e.,Ealpha= 4.885 MeV. The measured intensity for this combined a transition (Ialpha= 0.9860 +/- 0.0008) is that for populating both levels. The assumed relative populations of ?20 % to the ground state and ?80 % to the 2.3 keV level are based on estimates by Martin [11] using the systematics of alpha-decay hinderance factors. Irrespective of the absolute alpha transition intensity to the 2.3 keV level, it seems clear that it is probably populated to a substantial extent. Furthermore, it is possible that the decay of this state is delayed and not in a prompt coincidence with the alpha feeding of it. The resulting 1/2-- greater than 5/2-transition is also likely to be very highly converted with the emission of 2.3 keV conversion electrons (ce). If the lifetime of this 2.3 keV state is comparable or longer lived than the pulse resolving time of the LS counting systems, than some fraction of these ce (and attendant 2.3 keVgammarays, if any) would be detected independent of the feeding alpha-decay branch. The LS detection efficiency for the ce would also be dependent on sample quenching conditions and on the specific discrimination levels or detection thresholds for the LS instruments. Detailed examinations of the LS spectra as a function of quench conditions verified these conjectures. The 2.3 keV ce transition was identified in spectra from both LS counters. A distinct low-energy peak centered at about 3 keV was observed. Its large relative magnitude, ranging from just less than 1 % to nearly 6 % in various spectra, excluded the possibility of attributing the peak to other non-alpha decay modes, e.g., to Auger electrons from the weak electron capture decay branch. Its magnitude was also quench dependent, and was invariably larger in the instrument having a shorter coincident pulse resolving time. When this ce component was subtracted from the total LS response and spectra, one could obtain a virtually quench-independent a emission rate. Although the total LS detection efficiencies (which included the 2.3 keV component) for the two LS counting systems differed substantially, the subtracted alpha emission rates obtained from both instruments where in excellent agreement and invariant of quench conditions. Based on these findings, all of the original 1993 results were also successfully re-analyzed and found to be in nearly perfect agreement with the 1994 results. Hence, this standardization of209Po was based on essentially two completely independent determinations that were separated by nearly a year in time, each of which was also based on the use of two different and independent LS counting systems. The standardization may be considered to be somewhat over-determined! It ultimately involved nearly 500 independent LS measurements with each instrument using over 40 different LS samples (covering a diverse range of sample compositions and quenching conditions) which were obtained from 9 different209Po solutions having gravimetrically related concentrations. The specification of measurement uncertainties and the uncertainty analysis procedures used throughout this paper follow the normal conventions of the NIST Radioactivity Group. These conventions are wholly compatible with those adopted by the principal international metrology standardization bodies [14,15]. All individual uncertainty components are expressed in terms of estimated (experimental) standard deviations (or standard deviations of the mean where appropriate) or quantities assumed to correspond to standard deviations irrespective of the method used to evaluate their magnitude. All of these component quantities are designated as "standard uncertainties." A propagated uncertainty, termed a "combined standard uncertainty," is expressed as what is assumed to be an estimated standard deviation which is equal to the positive square root of the total variance obtained by summing all variance (square of the standard uncertainty) and covariance components, however evaluated, using the law of propagation of uncertainty for the specific mathematical function given by the model of the measurement procedure [14]. By recently established NIST policy [15], the combined standard uncertainty is multiplied by a "coverage factor" ofk= 2 to obtain an "expanded uncertainty" which is assumed to provide an uncertainty interval having a level of confidence of roughly 90 % to 95 %. For comparative purposes, it should be noted that previous SRM certificates issued by the NIST Radioactivity Group used comparably-based uncertainty coverage factors ofk= 3. This former practice was historically rooted and was assumed to provide certified uncertainty intervals with somewhat higher confidence levels, approaching 95 % to 99 %. Many of the component standard uncertainty estimates, such as those for gravimetric determinations, detection efficiencies, and various correction factor and extrapolation procedures, are based on canonical values or on approximations by established procedures which were in turn determined by diverse experimental verifications and inferences and which were established by this laboratory over many years of experience. The209Po stock solution used to prepare the standards has a somewhat uncertain history. It was obtained by NIST from Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL) in May 1989; and, based on partial records, appears to have been originally produced and radiochemically separated by Mound Laboratory at least several years earlier [16]. The high degree of radionuclidic purity found in subsequent impurity evaluations suggests that it most probably was prepared by low-energy (p,n) reactions on natural monoisotopic209Bi. The stock solution, contained and shipped in a 1 mL glass minivial, consisted of a nominal 100 kBq209Po as polonium nitrate in about 0.6 mL of 5 mol . L-1nitric acid (HNO3). The stock solution was transferred and diluted with about 8 g of warmed 2 mol . L-1HCl using an aspirating plastic pycnometer for the transfer and subsequent rinsing of the minivial. The resulting solution (labelled A inFig. 1) was contained in a 20 mL wide-mouth glass vessel. Two gravimetrically determined aliquants of the solution were used to prepare two LS samples (described below). Rudimentary LS assays of these samples indicated that most of the polonium was transferred; roughly 97 % of that said by ORNL to be contained in the minivial. If this had not been the case (as has sometimes been found in trying to remove polonium from glass vessels [3]), then more heroic efforts could easily have been made to recover the polonium remaining in the minivial and adding it to solution A. This fortunately was unnecessary in this particular transfer. Solution A was subsequently kept warmed and unstoppered over a period of about 60 h in an attempt to remove or decrease the HNO3concentration in the solution by evolving NO2. Warming of the solution was maintained with an infrared heat lamp at temperatures around 60 degrees C to 70 degrees C. Higher temperatures were not employed in fear that the polonium might be hydrolyzed or volatilized and thereby lost from solution [4-6]. The resulting solution was labelled B. The activity concentrations of solutions A and B should hence be equal except for possible small evaporation losses during the warming. Solution B was then used to prepare the four sets of counting sources that are noted inFig. 1along with a master dispensing solution M.All of the solution aliquants used to prepare the counting sources and solution M were determined gravimetrically with an estimated uncertainty, corresponding to an assumed standard deviation, of +/- 10 mug to +/-30 mug. The mass determinations were made for the most part with single-pan suspension microbalances having internal balance reference weights. For sample aliquants ranging from 50 mg to 100 mg for the counting sources, the relative standard uncertainties in the sample mass measurements thus are about +/-0.01 % to +/-0.03 % in general, and about +/-0.06 % in worst cases, after appropriate gravimetric measurement air-buoyancy corrections, and considering the internal-balance-weight uncertainties, and typical mass measurement precision. Subsequent LS samples prepared from sealed ampoules of master solution M used sample masses typically ranging from 0.1 g to 1 g and thus had relative standard uncertainties of roughly +/-0.05 % in worst cases. For solution M which had an aliquant sample mass of greater than 7.5 g, the relative standard uncertainty in the sample mass is less than 0.001 percent. In all cases, aliquant sample masses were redundantly and independently determined from pycnometer-dispensed mass differences and from contained masses obtained from the differences between the final sample masses and initial tare masses of the containing vessels. Differences in the two mass determinations are typically less than 0.05 percent for sample masses greater than 100 mg. This type of sample mass verification was employed throughout the preparation of all samples given in this paper, and has mass uncertainties typical for the routine gravimetric procedures used in our laboratory. The uncertainty in the gravimetric dilution factor between solutions B and M is of course dominated by the uncertainty in the large HCl diluent mass which is in turn dominated by the uncertainties in the internal balance weights for the employed 2 kg single pan suspension balance, and has an estimated overall relative standard uncertainty of about +/-0.05 %. In preparing solution M, solution B was diluted with 2 mol . L-1HCl by a gravimetrically determined factor ofD= 147.243 +/-0.074 (about 7.5409 g of B in 1110.3 g of M). The solution M diluent was a carefully prepared HCl solution having a nominal acid concentration of 2.0 mol . L-1and density of (1.031 +/-0.002) g . mL-1at 22 degrees C. It was prepared from NIST high-purity, vacuum-distilled hydrochloric acid (nominal 9.8 mol . L-1) in doubly-distilled water. The uncertainty in the density is an estimated standard deviation based on independent gravimetric determinations of the total master solution mass and individually dispensed masses in known dispensing volumes. This identical HCl solution was also used in the transfer of the stock209Po solution to solution A. It along with a blank doubly-distilled water solution was also used in preparing some of the subsequent LS samples. The blank water and HCl solutions were used to vary the HCl content in some of these LS counting sources, to vary or match sample compositions (and hence sample quenching) for the different LS sources, and to prepare matched blanks of nearly identical composition for background subtractions. To prepare the209Po standard sources, approximately 5 mL of solution M was dispensed into each of 210 or so NIST 5 mL borosilicate-glass ampoules. Forty two, or about one out of every fifth ampoule that was filled, had been pre-weighed and then post-weighed to obtain an estimate of the dispensing precision and uncertainty in the contained solution mass. The ampoules were flame sealed after filling and weighing. The mean mass of the dispensed solution in the ampoules was (5.1597 +/- 0.0012) g. The uncertainty given here is the standard deviation of the 42 individually weighed masses of solution from which the mean was calculated. It corresponds to a relative standard deviation of the mean of 0.0036 %. Figure 3illustrates the dispensing precision as a function of ampoule filling. One may note that the mass variations appear to be somewhat larger with the later fillings (higher ampoule numbers) compared to that at the beginning (lower ampoule numbers). It is quite probable that this is not actually due to poorer dispensing precision into later ampoules, but rather is due to greater imprecision in the mass measurements at later times. One can speculate that this arose as the result of increasing imprecision in the balance readings introduced by fatigue of a laboratory worker who had to solely fill and seal 200+ampoules, along with pre- and post-weighing a substantial fraction of them, all of which was performed over the course of 5 h.Three 2pialpha point sources (labelled L1 through L3 inFig. 1) were prepared by depositing gravimetrically determined aliquants of solution B onto 2.5 cm diameter polished stainless steel (SS) disks. The deposits ranged from 39 mg to 51 mg of solution B, were dispersed and seeded with Ludox (E.I. DuPont de Nemours, Wilmington, DE),2and then were evaporated to dryness without heating in ambient air. The acid content of solution B, however, seriously corroded and pitted the surfaces of the SS source mounts which was probably intensified by remaining traces of HNO3in the solution. The sources were found to be unusable for quantitative a counting or a spectroscopy. It is also suspected that polonium may have been partially lost from the sources since the very low observed a emission rates (27 % to 36 % of that expected) seems too extreme to be accounted for solely by source self-absorption losses. Two additional sources (not shown inFig. 1) were prepared at a later time and labelled LX1 and LX2. They consisted of 207 mg and 66 mg, respectively, of gravimetrically determined aliquants of solution M (obtained from a randomly selected ampoule of the standard solution) which were deposited onto 2.5 cm diameter platinum disks. The somewhat more massive solution deposits were used because of the lower activity concentration of solution M. The deposits covered a surface area of roughly 4.5 cm2and 1.5 cm2and were similarly evaporated to dryness in air. Sources LX1 and LX2 were used both for confirmatory measurements by gas-flow proportional counting and for spectroscopic analyses of alpha-emitting impurities. Three point sources (labelled G1 through G3 inFig. 1) forgamma- and x-ray measurements were also prepared. They consisted of 32 mg to 82 mg of solution B deposited onto annular source mounts backed with ?7 mg . cm-2plastic tape (a glued polyester film). After the deposits air dried, the sources were covered and sealed with an identical layer of the tape. The sample compositions for the LS counting sources are summarized inTable 1. Excepting a few samples that were prepared for special spectral investigations (and which will be noted later), the LS counting sources, in all cases, consisted of an appropriate aliquant of one of the209Po solutions and approximately 10 mL or 14 mL of a prepared commercially-available LS cocktail mix contained within nominal 22 mL LS counting vials. The cocktail was "Ready Safe" (Beckman Instruments, Fullerton, CA), a prepared scintillation fluor in a polyarylalkane (i.e., an alkylated biphenyl) solvent having surfactant agents [17]. Some of the sources also contained respective proportions of a blank doubly-distilled water solution and the carefully prepared blank HCl solution. The water and HCl solution additions were done, as noted earlier, to vary the LS sample compositions to study sample quenching effects. In all cases, the sources were compared with matched blanks of nearly identical composition for background subtractions. The 1993 LS samples (A1 through N6 inTable 1) were prepared in high-density polyethylene LS vials, whereas the 1994 sources were contained in conventional glass LS vials. The change in vials was made to exclude the possibility that the initially inexplicable LS results were due to the use of plastic vials. Table 1summarizes the specific209Po solution used to prepare the sources; the range for the massmsof the209Po solution aliquant used in the source; the range for the total source massmtot(which is the sum ofmsand the masses of the scintillation cocktail,mr, and any blank water, mw, or blank HCl,ma, used in the source); the range for the aqueous phase content in the source, expressed as a percentage (paq= 100 . [ms+ mw+ma]/mtot); and the range for the nominal normality of the acid content in the aqueous phase (Naq= 2.0 [ms+ ma]/[mNone+ mw+ma]). Although the values given inTable 1are summarized in terms of approximate ranges, it should be recalled that each of thems,mv,ma, andmr, masses in every sample was determined with an estimated relative standard uncertainty of +/-0.05 %. Samples A1 and A2 and B1 through B3 were prepared nearly identically with aboutms?52 mg to 65 mg of solution A or B in aboutmr?10 g of cocktail. Corresponding matched blanks containedma?51 mg to 60 mg of the blank HCl solution inmr?10 g of cocktail. Samples B4 through B6 were prepared withms?50 mg andmw=1 g inmr=10 g. The additional water in these samples would essentially match the total sample masses (or volumes) of the MA1 through MD3 sample series. Use of the blank water also more closely matched the quenching conditions in the two sample sets. Following an initial series of LS measurements on samples B4-B6, the samples were adjusted to the approximateNaq= 2 mol . L-1acid normality of the M samples. This was achieved by the addition of approximately 0.25 g to 0.3 g of the very pure NIST concentrated HCl. These adjusted samples are identified inTable 1as samples B4x through B6x. The corresponding matched blanks were similarly adjusted. Four randomly selected sealed ampoules of the209Po solution standard were used to prepare the 12 M series samples shown inFig. 1. Each containedms?1 g inmr?10 g. All further samples (not shown inFig. 1) were also prepared using the sealed ampoules. Sample series N1 through N6, P1 through P5, Q1 through Q4, and Q5 through Q8 (along with all of their corresponding blanks) were prepared with varying quantities ofms,mw,ma, andmrto achieve varyingpaqandNaqsample compositions that could be used to systematically study cocktail stability, sample quenching, and spectral effects. Compositions of samples used in special spectral investigations are given later. The two LS counting systems were: (1) a Beckman LS7800 model LS counter equipped with two Hamamasutu R331-05 photomultiplier tubes (PMT) operating in a coincidence mode, a logarithmic pulse amplifier coupled to an analog-to-digital converter (ADC) for spectral pulse-height analysis, and an external137Cs source for Compton-edge (Horrocks number) quench monitoring [18]; and (2) a Packard Tri-Carb 2500TR LS analyzer employing two matched high performance PMT also operating in coincidence, but with linear amplification for ADC pulse-height spectral analysis, and an external low-energy gamma-ray133Ba source that is used to obtain an instrument-provided "transformed Spectral Index of the External Standard (tSIE)" quench indicating parameter [19]. Resolving times for the two instruments are slightly different [20,21]. Their relative magnitudes were particularly of interest in terms of interpreting the data in regard to the existence of the delayed isomeric state in205Pb. The resolving times of the coincidence gates for simultaneous detection of singles PMT events were comparable:tauc= 22 ns andtauc= 18 ns in the Beckman and Packard instruments, respectively. Of greater interest, are the resolving times (i.e., equivalent deadtimes) for detection of coincident pulses. These were:tau? 5 mus to 33 mus in the Beckman, andtau? 12 muS in the Packard. The latter instrument has a fixed (i.e., "non-extending") resolving deadtime. Thetauranges for the former result from the resolving time's dependence on pulse height. The spectrometer would of course spend the vast majority of its time counting the principal209Po alpha. Using the pulse heights for the dominant alpha peak (i.e., its channel number locations), the typical resolving times for the Beckman instrument weretau= (15+/-4) muS. The Horrocks number (HNone) quench indicating parameter used with the Beckman system is based on the downward spectrum shift of the Compton edge of the external137Csgamma-ray standard with increasing sample quenching. The parameter corresponds to the spectral channel number shift between the quenched sample and an unquenched blank sample. The channel number shift (c2-c1) is, in this case, equal to a logarithmic energy ratio log(E2/E1). The Packard system's quench indicating parametertSIEis based on a proprietary mathematical transform of the energy distribution of the133Ba generated Compton spectrum. The transform is said to be used to correct for spectral distortions arising, for example, from wall effects, volume variations, and color quenching. The parameter consists of a relative quenching scale in which unquenched samples correspond totSIE= 1000. The quench parametersHNoneandtSIEare inversely correlated and scale proportionally with variations in the LS sample composition that effect the chemical quenching. Figure 4, for example, illustrates the correlation between the two parameters for the N1 through N6 samples prepared and measured in 1993. The slope d(tSIE)/d(H#) corresponds to a decrease of about 3.5 units oftSIEfor every unit ofH#. A typical and representative illustration of the effect of LS sample composition changes is shown inFig. 5. It shows the relative change in the two quench parameters as a function of the acid contentNaqin the P1 through P5 samples which were prepared and measured in 1994. The values given inFig. 5are ratios ofH#/(93.65+/-0.69) and (439.8+/-1.2)/tSIEthat consist of normalizations to the quench parameters for the least quenched P5 sample. The quench parameters similarly scale with other LS sample composition variables such asmsorpaq(seeTable 1). The results given here are based on the 1994 re-evaluation of the originally collected 1993 data. This re-evaluation took account of the confounding by the 2.3 keV delayed isomeric state in205Pb. Two corrected LS counting rate concentrations were evaluated. The firstRalphaeis that obtained from integrating the full-energy LS spectra, while the secondRalphais that obtained after subtraction of the component responses from the 2.3 keV205Pb transition. The integrated LS spectra energy regions, in terms of approximate beta energy, for the two are roughly from about DeltaEalphae= 0 keV to 2000 keV forRalphae, and from about DeltaEalpha? 30 keV to 2000 keV forRalpha. The two counting rate concentrations are given byNonewhereNoneNoneNoneNoneNoneNoneNoneNoneNoneNoneThe differenceRe= (Ralphae-Ralpha) is, of course the approximate LS counting rate concentration contribution due to the205Pb 2.3 keV transition (presumed to be due predominantly to ce). gross integral counts in the region DeltaEalphaeobtained from a spectrum of a given LS source at measurement timeT;the corresponding gross integral counts in region DeltaEalphaefor background obtained from a spectrum of a matched blank LS sample;gross integral counts in the region DeltaEalphaof the source spectrum;the corresponding gross integral counts in the region DeltaEalphafor the background spectrum;counting (live) time interval for measurement of both the source and matched blank;mass of the209Po solution used in the LS source;209Po decay constant;208Po decay constant;the decay time interval from the midpoint of the measurement time interval to a common reference time;208Po to209Po impurity ratio in terms of their respective a emission rates at the reference time. Two very small corrections, both less than 0.1 % and of opposing magnitude, were later applied toRalphato obtain the209Po solution standard alpha-particle emission rate concentrationAalpha. The first correction factorkNoneconsisted of an extrapolation ofRalphato zero energy by extrapolatingRalphaunder theRalphaportion of the spectra. The second correction factorkECwas to remove LS response contributions arising from the EC branch of209Po decay fromRalpha. The lower limits of the energy regions DeltaEalphaused to evaluate the 1993 data were slightly different for the two LS systems: for the Beckman instrument, DeltaEalpha?30 keV (A and B sample series) and DeltaEalpha?45 keV (M and N sample series); for the Packard, DeltaEalpha?19 keV (all sample series). Evaluation of the later 1994 LS data also used slightly different integrating regions (see Sec. 2.5). The conversions of spectral channel numbers to a beta energy scale are, at best, only very approximate. First, one must recognize that the light energy transfer mechanisms in the scintillator/solvent mixtures are very non-linear at low energies. Second, the channel number to energy conversions are dependent on sample quenching. Third, and lastly, it is difficult to directly compare the spectra from the two LS systems since the Beckman instrument with its logarithmic amplification gives ADC channel numbers corresponding to a logarithmic energy scale while the conversion of channel number to energy is nominally linear with the Packard. A comparison of the209Po LS spectra obtained with the two instruments is shown inFig. 6. The spectra were obtained in 1994 with LS sample P3. The LS response from the dominant 4.88 MeV alpha of209Po appears as a peak at around roughly 300 to 500 keV in the corresponding beta energy scale. This results from a particles (with their relatively short ranges) having scintillation yields that are typically a factor of 8 to 12 lower than that from beta emitters. The LS response from the205Pb conversion electron, centered at approximately 3 keV, is readily apparent in both spectra. The relative magnitudes of the conversion electron (Re) and alpha peaks (Ralpha) shown in the spectra may deceive on first appearance. One should note that the ordinate axis is in units of counts per secondper keV, and that the abscissa is a logarithmic energy scale. The ratios ofRe/Ralphain the two spectra ofFig. 6are actually 0.026 and 0.044 for the Beckman and Packard instruments, respectively. The large difference in theRe/Ralphavalues may be attributed to differences in detection and resolution of the205Pb conversion electron (ce) by the two instruments. One may also note that in the region below 10 keV, the spectrum obtained with the Packard instrument has only 9 or 10 channels of data while that from the Beckman instrument has over 50. Values ofRalphafor the two spectra shown inFig. 6are in better than 0.2 % agreement. In the region above about 550 keV, both spectra have net counting rates after background subtraction of virtually zero. The spectra in the region from about 30 keV to 100 keV are very flat and have net counting rates that are also very small which permits a relatively easy extrapolation ofRalphabelow theRepeak. Additional spectral analysis considerations are treated below (Sec. 2.6). The 1993 LS measurements were based on averages of 5 to 10 replicate measurements of each sample interspersed with background measurements of blank samples. Each measurement ranged from 30 min to 120 min in duration. Because the initial results were not understood many of the samples were remeasured from 2 to 5 more times (with each subsequent sequence consisting of 5 to 10 measurements) over periods of nearly 100 d. The averaged results forRalphaeand Ralphawere decay corrected to the common reference time of 1200 EST 15 March 1994 for direct comparison with the 1994 LS results. Values ofTused for the decay corrections therefore often exceeded a year. The value ofI= 0.00124 used for the impurity correction was independently obtained from alpha spectrometry (see Sec. 2.8). All of the A and B series LS samples exhibited large and not very systematic variations in both quench indicating parameters and in values ofRalphae. The measurement results for sample A1 as a function of measurement time, shown inFig. 7, are typical. Each plotted value inFig. 7is based on the mean of 5 to 10 measurements with the Beckman instrument. Over a period of approximately 100 d, the quench parameterHNonevaried from about 75 to over 160, with the largest rate of change occurring in the first 10 or so days. The Packard's correspondingtSIEfor sample A1, over a shorter 55 d period, ranged from 386 to 261. For 5 to 10 replicate measurements, these quench parametersHNoneandtSIEwere typically determined with a precision having a relative standard deviation of the mean (sm) of 0.1 % to 0.3 %. Along with the change inHNone, the mean values ofRalphaeover the same time ?100 d interval decreased by over 2 %. The counting results for every A and B series sample measured with either instrument exhibited similar changes but of slightly differing magnitudes. Later LS samples prepared from the standard solution ampoules did not undergo such large temporal variations in quench parameters andRalphae. It may have occurred with only the A and B series samples because of larger quantities of unexpelled HNO3in these more concentrated solutions. The HNO3content of the latter master solution used to prepare the ampoules was diluted by a factor of nearly 150. Nitric acid could very well have a more deleterious effect on the LS cocktails than the HCl diluting solution and could therefore possibly account for the differences observed with the various LS samples. Solution A had a HNO3normality of about 0.35 mol . L-1, and solution B may have been comparable if little of HNO3was effectively removed by the gentle heat treatment. AlthoughRalphaewas found to vary with time, with sample quenching conditions, and with the instrument used to perform the measurement, the values ofRalphawere invariant. Figure 7illustrates this nicely. The mean values ofRalphafor sample A1 over the same time interval are constant and independent of the sample quenching changes. This demonstration is achieved even more powerfully inFigs. 8and9which aggregate all of the measurement results on the series A and B samples. Each plotted value in the figures represents the mean of 5 to 10 measurements of eitherRalphae(closed circles) orRalpha(closed triangles). The multiple values shown for a given sample are the mean values for additional 5 to 10 measurement sequences obtained at later times (and with changing quench parameters). The illustrated error bars correspond to the calculated standard deviations for the 5 to 10 replicate measurements. They correspond tosmvalues ranging from 0.02 % to 0.06 %. Figures 8and9give the results obtained with the Beckman and Packard instruments, respectively. Examinations of the figures indicate that although the values ofRalphaevary substantially between instruments, between samples, and at different times for any given sample, all of theRalphavalues are essentially constant. This is exactly what is to be expected: invariant and 100 % alpha detection efficiencies resulting inRalphavalues that are independent of quenching conditions or changes; very quench dependent and instrument dependentRevalues for the low energy205Pb ce; and a greaterReresponse in the instrument with shorter pulse resolving time. The mean values ofRalphaacross all samples and measurements are 12560 s-1. g-1for the Beckman (Fig. 8) results, and 12553 s-1. g-1for the Packard (Fig. 9). 3The two respective mean values havesmvalues of 0.015 % and 0.017 % based on totals of 197 and 149 replicate measurements. The mean value for all 346 measurements obtained with both instruments is 12557 s-1. g-1withsm= 0.016 %. On application of the gravimetrically determined dilution factorD= 147.243, the corresponding counting rate concentration for the209Po solution standard isRalpha/D=85.28 s-1. g-1. The differences in observedRevalues obtained with the two LS systems, due to differences in the detection and resolution of the205Pb ce, is even more clearly demonstrated in the results for the 12 M series of samples. The samples (three prepared from each of four randomly selected sealed ampoules) were of closely matched composition and had average quench parameters ranging fromHNone= 134 to 135 andtSIE= 287 to 291 which did not appreciably alter over a two week period. The observed values forRalphaeandRalphaobtained with the two LS counters are illustrated inFig. 10. Each plotted determination is based on 10 replicate measurements of each sample on each instrument. The grand meansRalphae(Beckman) = (86.89 +/-0.26) s-1. g-1and Ralphae(Packard) = (87.75 +/- 0.24) s-1. g-1differ by about 1 %, while the two grand meansRalpha(Beckman) = (85.43 +/-0.25) s-1. g-1andRalpha(Packard) = (85.43 +/- 0.23) s-1. g-1are in agreement to four significant figures. The above uncertainty intervals given for these means are standard deviations of the means (sm) with 119 degrees of freedom. These results also demonstrate the excellent between-sample and between-ampoule precision. Table 2(for the Beckman data) andTable 3(for the Packard) summarizes the precision estimatorssmfor 10 replicate measurements on any one sample, and for the 3 means of samples prepared from any one ampoule. All of the tabulated meanRalphavalues are statistically equivalent, independent of the instrument used, specific sample, or ampoule used to prepare the samples. The systematic variation ofRe(obtained from the differencesRalphae-Ralpha) with sample quenching is exhibited in the results ofFigs. 11and12for the N series of samples. These data are based on 5 replicate measurements of each sample with the Beckman instrument, and 10 measurements on each sample with the Packard. Their quench parameters were previously provided inFig. 4. Sample quenching was systematically varied by changing the sample compositions, in this case by varying the mass of209Po solutionmsused to prepare the samples. Total sample masses and aqueous contentpaqwere kept nearly constant by the additions of blank water (seeTable 1). The extrapolations to zero solution mass (ms= 0) ofFigs. 11and12could equally have been performed using the acid contentNaqvariable. Figures 11and12also illustrate the replicate measurement precision for these LS measurements since all measurement results on each sample are plotted along with their respective error bars that correspond to the total statistical "counting errors." 4The precision is typical of that obtained with all samples prepared from the sealed ampoules. The weightedchi2-minimized (least-squares) regression lines shown inFig. 11(for the Beckman results) have fitted parameters of:NoneandNoneThe linear fits to the data were performed with weighting factors equal to the reciprocal variances 1/sp2(R). The fits were performed using all 30 measurement values. The standard deviations on the fitted parameters thus havev= (30-2) degrees of freedom. The magnitude and uncertainty on the slope dRalpha/dms= (0.08+/-0.14) s-1. g-1clearly indicates thatRalphais invariant ofmsand of accompanying quench changes. Similarly, the Packard results ofFig. 12are:NoneandNonewithv= (60-2) degrees of freedom. The meanRalphavalues across all measurements and samples areRalpha(Beckman) = (85.492 +/- 0.212) s-1. g-1andRalpha(Packard) = (85.424 +/- 0.124) s-1. g-1. Several distinct observations may be noted. First, the LS response for the205Pb ce (as seen by theRalphae-Ralphadifferences) is greater for the Packard instrument, and is more dependent on changes in sample quenching (as seen by the magnitudes of the fitted slopes dRalphae/dms). Second, the magnitudes of dRalpha/dmswith attendant uncertainties indicate thatRalphais independent ofms(and hence quenching). Third, all of the above fourRalphavalues, whether obtained from the regression intercepts or from the averaging, are statistically equivalent. The results of 1994 LS measurements, obtained with samples P1 through P5, Q1 through Q4, and Q5 through Q8 (seeTable 1) were essentially a redundant and independent reconfirmation of the reanalyzed 1993 results. The LS samples had systematically varied sample quenching using different sample compositions. As indicated inTable 1, some of the sample series used larger scintillator volumes to further minimize quenching. Analysis procedures used to obtain the counting rate concentrationsRalphaeandRalphawere identical to those employed with the 1993 data. The LS spectra integrating regions DeltaEalpha(in terms of approximate beta energies) were:Each sample was measured with each instrument from 5 to 18 times. All results were corrected for decay (as well as for the208Po impurity) to the common reference time of 1200 EST 15 March 1994. Figure 13summarizes the four sets of results obtained with the two LS systems. As previously: (1)Ralphaeis invariably larger for the Packard instrument than that obtained with the Beckman (which had a longer pulse resolving time); (2) variations inRalphaewith sample quenching (reflecting differences in detection and resolution of the205Pb ce) is also greater with the Packard; (3) values ofRalphaobtained with either instrument are invariant of sample quenching; and (4) theRalphavalues for both instruments are statistically equivalent and virtually identical. Table 4contains a summary of the various means forRalphaeandRalpha, along with their precision estimators, and comparisons of the fitted parameters for the unweighted linear regressions shown inFig. 13. In these cases, the regressions were performed using the mean counting rate concentrations for each sample. The uncertainties in the fitted parameters thus havev= (5 - 2) andv= (4 - 2) degrees of freedom for the P and Q sample series, respectively. Extensive examinations of the LS spectra were performed throughout various phases of this work. These examinations involved systematic studies of the detailed shapes and structure of the spectra as functions of the LS sample compositions, chemical quenching changes, and source configurations. They were performed largely in order to understand the observed LS measurement results (particularly in terms of interpretations and compatibility with the209Po decay scheme), and to insure the validity of the analysis procedures used to obtain the previously givenRalphavalues. Typical gross effects of chemical quenching on the209Po spectrum are illustrated inFig. 14for the Q5 through Q8 samples. The four spectra were obtained with the Packard instrument. The quench parameters varied fromtSIE= 528 for least-quenched sample Q5 totSIE=414 for Q8 and were determined with a precision having a relative standard deviation of the mean of 0.16 % to 0.17 %. Two dominant features can be noted. With increasing quenching in the samples (i.e., decreasingtSIEvalues), the broad alpha peaks at around an equivalent beta energy of 350 keV to 550 keV shift to lower energies, and the integrated areas of the low-energy ce peaks progressively decrease in magnitude. These latter peak areas are, of course, merely theRevalues as given, for example, by the changing (Ralphae-Ralpha) differences inFig. 13. The alpha peak areas (given byRalphainFig. 13), although shifted to different energies, are invariant of the quenching changes. These alpha peak shapes are considered in greater detail inFig. 15. One may observe that the spectrum for the least quenched Q5 sample almost has the appearance of an unresolved doublet. This feature was also seen (at times in this laboratory, as well as by other researchers) in other LS spectra from monoenergetic alpha-emitting radionuclides, e.g.,208Po [3], and is frequently attributed to "optical effects" arising from refractions of the light photons in the LS vial walls, or from light reflections in the LS counting chamber or off the vial walls. Similar "doublets" were also observed however, in the earlier 1993 spectra obtained with polyethylene vials, and was seen in spectra from both the Beck-man and Packard LS counting systems. These were surprising findings. One would think that the glass and polyethylene vials have considerably different refraction and surface reflection properties; and that there undoubtedly are some differences in the "optics" for the two counting systems. This "doublet" effect is rarely apparent in more highly quenched samples when the alpha peak shifts to lower energies as shown inFig. 15. 5With the shifts to lower energies, the resolution (or peak widths) also decrease on an absolute basis. The peak widths, given by full-width-at-half-maximum (FWHM) values, for the four spectra ofFig. 15range from about 120 keV to 170 keV. On a relative basis compared to the peak centroids, however, all four have FWHM values of approximately 30 % (within 1 % or 2 %). Another surprising feature of the LS spectra is the presence of "anomalous bumps" distinctly separated from the a peaks and at energies just below these peaks. These bumps were actually identified prior to understanding the detection of the delayed 2.3 keV ce when the LS results still seemed inexplicably discrepant. It was thought that perhaps the differences in the initially observedRalphaecounting rates between the two LS counters might be due to these mysterious bumps that could not be attributed to any known transitions in209Po decay. As a result, the spectral structures and magnitudes of these bumps were extensively examined and systematically studied. They were observed in all of the LS spectra, in all of the samples ranging from the 1993 A, B, M, and N series of samples to the 1994 P and Q sample series (which therefore encompassed use of both polyethylene and glass LS vials), and in both counting systems. Figure 16contains a typical example of these "anomalous bumps" as seen in spectra of sample P3 obtained with both spectrometers. The bumps, like alpha peaks, shift to lower energies with increased quenching as seen in the series of spectra inFig. 17. In this case, the bump centroids decrease from about 210 keV in the least quenched sample Q5 to about 150 keV in sample Q8. The data ofFig. 17(unlike all other displayed LS spectra) were smoothed using an averaging Savitsky-Golay differentiation technique to eliminate the wide fluctuations in the data (arising from large variations in the small counting rates per channel and their inherently large statistical "counting errors") and thereby to more clearly show the bump structures. The shifts of the bumps to lower energies were not found to be systematically correlated to the alpha peak shifts. About the only conclusive statement that can be made is that the energy differences in the bump shifts were less than that for the shifts in the alpha peak centroids for given quench changes. If a correlation exists, it is not a simple relationship. There were also suggestions that the bumps became more dispersed and broadened (on both an absolute and relative basis) with increasing sample quenching, and that perhaps even secondary bumps appeared in the valleys between the principal bump and the alpha peak (see, for example, the spectra for Q7 and Q8 inFig. 17). The relative magnitudes of the bumps in comparison with the alpha peak (in the same spectrum) were highly variable, ranging from less than 0.32 % to over 2.2 %. Again, there was no obvious correlation or simple relationship between the magnitude of the bumps and any sample quenching or sample counting conditions. For reasons outlined immediately below, it is believed that these anomalous bumps are most likely due to optical effects from alpha interactions in the cocktails, and not due to LS responses from some other non-alpha transitions. Why, how, when, and where they appear in the spectra, however, still remains unknown. Sample preparation effects due to polonium in a two-phase condition can not be ruled out as the causal factor. This would be surprising however considering the presence of the bumps over such a wide range of sample compositions and conditions. It should also be emphasized that if these bumps were not included as part of the 4pialpha LS response, then theRalphavalues given previously would not have formed a quench-independent and consistent data set. Several LS spectra obtained using alpha-beta (alpha-beta) pulse discrimination were also measured to insure that the previously ascribed spectral interpretations were valid, particularly in regard to the assignments of the "anomalous bumps" to alpha interactions and of the very low ?3 keV peak to conversion electrons. The LS counting sources used to obtain these spectra consisted of about a 1 g aliquant of the209Po standard solution (obtained from a randomly selected sealed ampoule, #146) in about 14 g of a prepared scintillation fluid. The scintillating cocktail was "Ultima Gold AB" (Packard Instrument Co.) which was selected because it provides slow pulse decay characteristics which are necessary for effective alpha-beta pulse discriminations. The prepared scintillator is also reported to be very efficacious for accepting high mineral acid loadings (up to 2 mL of 2 mol . L-1HNO3in 10 mL of scintillator). It may be noted that the previously used "Ready Safe" scintillation cocktail did not provide adequate alpha-beta pulse discrimination. The spectra were obtained with a slightly different model of the Packard Tri-Carb 2500TR LS spectrometer that was used for all of the previously described Packard instrument measurements. Pulse discrimination between alpha and beta pulses relies upon their differing pulse decay times. Initial spectra were taken with a nearly arbitrarily chosen mid-range pulse discrimination setting with the expectation that there would be some accidental overflows of alpha pulses in the beta spectrum, and vice versa. Figure 18gives a composite of the respective alpha spectrum (broken line) and beta spectrum (solid line) obtained with the initially chosen discriminator setting. As shown, the low energy peak centered at around 3 keV is clearly due to beta (i.e., electron) pulses; whereas alpha selected (and beta discriminated) pulses clearly comprise the ascribed broad alpha peak. Expanded scale details of these spectra in the energy interval of 50 keV to 600 keV are given in the upper trace ofFig. 19. Of the intense alpha peak, only a very small fraction of the response is from beta selected pulses. These are attributed to "accidentals" whose relative magnitude was dependent on the specific discrimination setting used. At this same setting, less than 20 % of the total area of the "anomalous bump" was due to selected beta pulses. Spectra obtained with a 25 % change in the initial alpha-beta pulse decay discrimination setting resulted in those in the lower trace ofFig. 19. In this latter case, the accidentals under the alpha peak dramatically decreased and virtually the entire anomalous bump is comprised of selected alpha pulses. The findings reinforced the belief that the anomalous bumps were indeed the result of some unknown optical effects in detecting some small fraction of the alpha interactions. Lastly, in an attempt to discern (if not understand) the possible optical effects, several spectra were obtained using sources of very different counting configuration. It was thought that the "optics" of these configurations would of necessity be substantially different. The configurations consisted of a normally prepared sample source containingmtot?11 g of scintillator and sample in a 22 mL glass LS vial (nominal 2.5 cm diam. ); a source containingmtot?23 g of scintillator and sample in a similar 22 mL glass vial such that the vial was completely filled with cocktail; and another completely filled source in a smaller 1.4 cm diameter glass vial that was in turn concentrically contained in a C6H14(hexane) filled 22 mL vial. The sources are designated N (for "normal"), F (for "full"), and D (for "double"), respectively. The sources were prepared with closely matched chemical quenching conditions, and the spectra obtained with them were normalized to the209Po solution mass contained in each. In this way, if the sources had been in identical configurations and with identical optics, then one could expect identical spectra for them. Comparison of the N and D sources was made to see if the "anomalous bumps" were at all associated with the presence of an air space in the N source configuration. Conceptually, it was thought that perhaps a lower energy alpha peak might arise because of scintillations from any cocktail (above the air gap) that adheres to the vial cap surfaces. The filled configuration of source D would obviate this condition, although there would of necessity be some loss of light from scintillations occurring in the cocktail volume above the vial cap. Comparisons were made with the D source configuration since it is known that the resolution of alpha spectra can be improved by decreasing the sample source cross-sectional area (e.g., by using smaller diameter sample tubes) [22]. The smaller diameter vial of source D was placed inside the larger 22 mL vial to keep the total source volume constant. The glass wall of the inner vial was virtually transparent since it was surrounded by hexane, which has a nearly identical refraction index as the scintillation cocktail. The results of these comparisons are shown in the spectra ofFigs. 20,21, and22. The first (Fig. 20) provides the full spectra including the low energy ce peaks. The second (Fig. 21) gives details of the alpha peaks. The broad alpha peak tailing into the "anomalous bump" region is shown lastly (Fig. 22). The integral intensity of the ce peaks progressively decreases in going from the N to F to D configurations. This may partly be due to light losses above the vial caps in the fully filled F and D configurations. The N configuration shows the apparent "doublet" nature of the broad alpha peak and the by-now consistent "anomalous bump." In source configuration F, the bump is still present but is of less intensity and is shifted to a lower energy. At the same time, the alpha peak from source F has substantially broadened in comparison to source N, and has even more of the appearance of an unresolved doublet with a very long low energy tail. The most surprising results were that for source configuration D. The alpha resolution with a peak centered at 350 keV was as expected considerably improved with a FWHM of about 70 keV which is less than half that obtained with configuration N. Yet, this alpha peak is also accompanied by another large and adjoint secondary alpha peak centered at 250 keV. This secondary peak encompasses a large fraction of the total alpha response (about 1/4) and also contained very long low energy tailing. The spectra of configuration D did not exhibit any of the usually-found "anomalous bumps," but the tailing on the secondary alpha peak had a discrete inflection point. All of the above described spectral structures (in every source configuration) appear, in fact, to be nothing but a complex variety of shape changes (of a continuous nature) in the alpha peak. These spectral shape findings can not be explained (at least not by the present authors) in terms of any overall qualitative theory or model for the scintillation optics. The findings, however, tended to support previous contentions that the "anomalous bumps" were associated with true alpha interactions in the scintillator, and that they arise from some type of light-collection optical effects that in turn could be influenced by changes in source configuration. Independent confirmatory measurements of the209Po alpha emission rate concentration were performed by 2pialpha proportional counting of solid point sources LX1 and LX2. The detector consisted of a 12 cm diameter hemispherical gas-flow proportional counter. The counting gas was a "P-10" argon-methane (90:10) mixture. A detailed description of the detector and its operation has been previously described by Hutchinson [23]. The results of duplicate measurements of each source are given inFig. 23. The illustrated alpha emission rate concentrations as a function of source mass were obtained from the observed net counting rates (after background subtraction) which included an extrapolation to zero pulse height [23]. The corrected net rates were converted to concentrations by applying the known solution masses that were used to prepare the sources. The detection efficiency was assumed to be exactly 0.5 counts per alpha for a perfect 2pi steradian solid angle, exclusive of source self-absorption losses and source-mount back-scattering effects. The relative standard uncertainty in the 2pi efficiency is typically taken to be +/-2.5 % [23]. The sources had been measured in mid-June 1993, but the values reported here were decay corrected to the 15 March 1994 reference time for direct comparison with the LS measurement results. These values also contain a small correction for the known208Po impurity (including its decay) so that they correspond to only the209Po alpha emission rate concentration. The error bars shown on the data ofFig. 23represent one standard deviation uncertainty intervals for the assumed Poisson-distributed total statistical "counting error." These uncertainties ranged from +/-0.3 % to +/- 1.1 % for the four determinations. Figure 23also contains an extrapolation of the alpha emission rate concentration to zero source mass to account for source self absorption. The solid line corresponds to an unweightedchi2-minimized linear regression fitted to the data. The uncertainty bounds for the fit are shown as dotted lines. The fitted intercept (at zero source mass) for the alpha emission rate concentration is (88.41 +/-0.56 s-1. g-1. 6Using a weighted linear regression (with weighting by the reciprocal of the Poisson "counting error" variance), the fitted interceptis(88.52 +/-0.52) s-1. g-1which is indistinct from that for the unweighted fit. For "weightless" sources mounted on platinum, the backscattered fraction in 2pi has been shown to be 0.0175 +/-0.0025 [24,25]. Invocation of this 3.5 % back-scattering correction results in a corrected value of 85.5 s-1. g-1for the209Po alpha emission rate concentration for the solution standard. These applied corrections for self absorption (by extrapolation to zero mass) and back scattering (which assumed a condition of source weightlessness) are of course somewhat simplistic. In actuality, the source mass extrapolation ofFig. 23included some part of backscattering effects since the magnitude of any source mount scattering will of necessity by dependent on the source mass itself. The two effects are complexly related. Nevertheless, the relative standard uncertainty in the alpha emission rate concentration may be considered to be roughly about +/- 3 %, considering the uncertainties in the fitted intercept and in the 2pialpha detection efficiency (including the source absorption and scattering effects). Clearly, the 2pialpha measurements, although less accurate, admirably served as a suitable confirmatory determination that was completely independent of the LS measurement results. Analyses for alpha-emitting radionuclidic impurities were also made with the LX1 and LX2 point sources. The analyses were performed by alpha spectrometry using a Si surface-barrier junction detector which was suitably coupled to a 1024-channel pulse-height analyzer. Conversion gain settings were typically 5 keV to 10 keV alpha energy per channel. The sources were measured through a very thin film absorber to prevent surface contamination of the detector face. The film consisted of VYNS, a polyvinylchloride-polyvinylacetate copolymer, of nominal surface density ?10 mug . cm-2that was stretched on an aluminum annular support ring. Multiple spectra with counting time intervals ranging from 2 * 104s to 6 * 105s were obtained over the course of 26 d in the time period of May to June 1993. Typical spectra for the two sources, showing the partial region for the principal209Po 4.883 MeV alpha transition, are given inFig. 24. The effective energy resolution for the detector/source combination, in terms of the peak full width at half maximum (FWHM), is roughly 50 keV to 60 keV. This can be contrasted to an optimum 10 keV to 30 keV which would be expected from a "weightless" source without a backing mount. Low energy tailing, resulting from degradation of the alpha full energy as well as from some possible small influence of the unresolved209Po 4.622 MeV a, is evident in the spectra from both sources. The weak 4.622 MeV alpha [Ialpha= (0.0092+/-0.0005) alphas per decay] is completely masked by the more dominant 4.883 MeV peak. The low-energy peak broadening and observed FWHM energy resolution can not be attributed solely to209Po source material self absorption since the solution deposits used to prepare the sources were carrier free and therefore should have been nearly "weightless" after drying. More probable contributing factors were: inhomogeneous source depositing; deposits of unknown chemical impurities (most likely Pb and Bi); backscattering from the thick Pt source mounts; surface irregularities in the back mounts; and absorption in the VYNS barrier. The only observed alpha-emitting impurity, based on a total cumulative counting time exceeding 1.6*106s (?19 d), was208Po whose principal alpha (Ialpha= 0.999982+/-0.000002) has an energy ofEalpha= (5.1152+/-0.0015) MeV [11]. There was no evidence of210Po presence[Ealpha= (5.30438+/-0.00007) MeV;Ialpha= 1.00] [26,27] which is unsurprising because of its substantially shorter half-life(T= 138.4 d) and age of the209Po stock material. Detection of these two most likely polonium isotope impurities is greatly facilitated in that their principal alpha transitions have energies greater than that for209Po. Figures 25and26illustrate the relative208Po and209Po alpha intensities. The former, in full scale, clearly shows the large relative magnitude difference in the two peaks, although that for208Po is barely perceptible; the latter, in an expanded scale, demonstrates the distinct resolution and definition of the 5.115 MeV alpha from the208Po impurity. Three independent determinations of the208Po to209Po impurity ratio, in terms of their respective alpha-particle emission rate concentrations, were performed. The results, which were decay corrected to the common reference time of 1200 EST 15 March 1994, are summarized inTable 5. The propagated relative uncertainties for the "counting errors" and for location of peak backgrounds ranged from +/-1.6 % to +/-3.9 % and from +/-1.6 % to +/-2.1 %, respectively. The208Po/209Po impurity ratio mean for the three determinations was 0.00124 with a standard deviation of 0.00010 (or +/-8.1 % on a relative basis). Further examinations of the spectral backgrounds in certain energy regions could establish limits for the presence of any other alpha emissions. Impurity ratios, in terms of emission rate concentrations Xalpha/209Po, for alpha particles of energyEalpha(arising from an alpha-emitting impurity Xalphain the209Po standard solution) have the following lower limits: in the regionEalpha greater than 5.18 MeV (which includes210Po), Xalpha/209Po less than =2*10-6; in the region 3.5 MeV greater than =Ealpha less than = 4.2 MeV, Xalpha/209Po less than =6*10-4; and in the regionEalpha less than =3.5 MeV, Xalpha/209Po less than =2*10-5. Analyses for photon-emitting radionuclidic impurities were performed with samples Gl through G3 using two different spectrometry systems. The systems comprised (a) an intrinsic p-type Ge detector (having a NaI(T1) equivalent efficiency of 18 %) coupled to a 16384-channel pulse height analyzer (PHA) that spanned a 40 keV to 3300 keV energy region; and (b) an intrinsic n-type Ge detector (12 % NaI(T1) equivalent efficiency) which used a 8192-channel PHA spanning 8 keV to 915 keV. Both systems employed a 60 Hz puiser for rate normalizations. Detection efficiency curves for the systems were determined with calibrated (NIST SRM)241Am,111In,57Co,51Cr,85Sr,137Cs, and60Co sources. Photons associated with both the EC and alpha branch decays of209Po include Bi K x rays arising from K capture in the EC branch and from internal conversion fluorescence of the 896.6 keV transition in209Bi; the 896.6 keV gamma ray in209Bi; Pb K x rays from internal conversion of the 260.5 keV and 262.8 keV gamma rays in205Pb; and the 260.5 keV and 262.8 keV gamma rays in205Pb (seeFig. 2). All of these photons, including partial resolutions of the Pb and Bi Kalpha1alpha2and Kbeta1beta2x rays, were detected. Determinations of their absolute intensities, based on the present209Po calibration, will be reported separately [28] in a re-evaluation of the209Po decay scheme. No photons other than those associated with the decay of209Po were detected. Emission rate concentrations7for any other photons arising from photon-emitting impurities in the209Po standard solution have the following lower limits: less than 2*10-4s-1. g-1in the energy region 15 keV to 68 keV; less than 1.5*10-4s-1. g-1in the region 81 keV to 256 keV; less than 6*10-5s-1. g-1in the region 266 keV to 892 keV to; and less than 4*10-6s-1. g-1in the region 900 keV to 3300 keV, provided that the energy of any such unobserved photon is 4 keV or more different from the emissions accompanying the209Po decay. These limits were based on numerous independent measurements of the sources with the two spectrometer systems over a total counting time interval of 7.2 * 106s (?83 d). The LS determinations ofRalphaobtained with both counting systems and with all of the 1993 and 1994 samples are summarized inTable 6. The means given inTable 6were obtained from unweighted averages across all measurements in the given sample series. Weighted means were generally indistinguishable since reciprocal variance weighting factors were all of the same nominal magnitude. As shown previously inFigs. 8through13andTables 2through4, the mean value ofRalphafor any sample within a given sample series and obtained with a given instrument was statistically equivalent (with the possible exception of sample B6-seeFigs. 8and9) with that for any other sample. Similarly, as shown inTable 6, when these sample means are averaged over a given sample series, the resulting means for any two sample series were also equivalent. Further, the means obtained with either the Beckman instrument or the Packard were invariant. The ratio of meanRalphafor the A and B sample series to the meanRalphafor the M through Q sample series may be directly compared to the gravimetric dilution factor. These are:Nonecompared toD(gravimetric) = 147.24 +/- 0.07 which is approximately 0.2 % larger. Although they are in statistical agreement, the absolute differences are slightly larger than that usually obtained by our laboratory for verifications of gravimetric dilution factors. Typically, LS verification measurements of dilution factors areNone. As noted previously, the differences may in part be due to chemical quenching differences arising from greater quantities of HNO3in the A and B sample series. Nevertheless, these observed differences are irrelevant insomuch as the209Po calibration can be based directly on the measurements of samples (sealed ampoules) of the master solution. The overall results ofTable 6may be averaged in several ways. Consideration of the possible mean values forRalphaderived in these different ways is informative. With the Beckman instrument, the meanRalphafor all 27 samples of the M through Q sample series, involving a total of 260 independent LS determinations ofRalphais (85.469 +/- 0.244) s-1. g-1. The above standard deviation has a corresponding relative standard deviation of the mean ofsm= +/-0.018 %. For the Packard instrument, based on 276 measurements with 27 samples, the meanRalphais (85.466 +/-0.209) s-1. g-1(sm= 0.015 %). As noted, these aggregated means can be compared to that obtained from replicate measurements on any one sample (Tables 2and3; andFigs. 8through13), as well as to the means obtained from all samples within the various sample series (Tables 2through4, and6). They are all equivalent. One could alternatively average across the means obtained from the results from each of the seven ampoules to obtain grand means. These are (85.460 +/- 0.063) s-1. g-1(sm= 0.024 %) and (85.460 +/- 0.055) s-1. g-1(sm= 0.021 %) for the Beckman and Packard results, respectively. The precision estimators on these grand means reflect the between-ampoule variability. Lastly, the overall mean obtained from all 536 determinations (from both LS instruments) on all 27 samples from the 7 different ampoules isRalpha= (85.468+/-0.227) s-1. g-1(sm= 0.012 %). It is significant to realize that the 536 measurement results embodied in this last mean were obtained under a tremendous range of conditions. They were obtained: (i) with two different counting systems; (ii) using different DeltaEalphaintegrating regions; (iii) with different counting time intervals; (iv) from measurements separated by more than a year in time; (v) with background subtraction variabilities over this time (vi) with decay corrections for209Po as well as for the208Po impurity over this same time; (vii) using counting sources in both glass and polyethylene LS vials; (viii) with sources prepared from 7 randomly selected ampoules of the209Po standard solution; and (ix) with 27 samples having wide variations in sample composition (including aliquant size of the209Po solution and hence emission rates) and chemical quenching conditions. The results of these determinations ofRalphawere also subjected to extensive statistical tests on subsets of the data across a variety of variables: sample identity including sample preparation order, sample composition, sample masses, sample replicates for a given ampoule of the209Po solution, the timing and sequence of the LS measurements, and the LS measurement system used. These includedchi2-tests of the homogeneity in subsets of the observed sample variances (across the variables),F-tests of the homogeneity in the various subset sample means,t-tests of differences between the various subset means, and tests of possible correlations and biases using analysis of variance (ANOVA) techniques with sequential two-way classifications of the variables. None of the tests indicated any statistically significant differences in any of the tested subset sample means or sample variances. The agreement in the results between the various sample series and between the two LS counting systems, as provided inTable 6, are representative. The 536 values comprised in the meanRalpha= (85.468+/-0.227) s-1. g-1are normally distributed. This is demonstrated inFig. 27where a frequency distribution of the data is superimposed on a Gaussian (normal) probability distribution function (solid line) having parameters ofmu= 85.468 and sigma = 0.227. 8The probability function was normalized to then= 536 sample size so that both distributions have equal areas. The209Po alpha-particle emission rate concentration was obtained from the meanRalphaon application of the two aforementioned correction factors, viz.,Aalpha= RAkNoneEkEC. The first,kZE, was found to be highly variable from spectrum to spectrum because of the low counting statistics and imprecision in locating a baseline under the ce peak in extrapolating to zero energy. As a result of this variability, it was decided to apply an average correction to all of the spectra. Values ofkZEranged from lows ofkZE?1.0002 to highs ofkZE?1.0008, with a majority centering around a value ofkZE?1.0006 (i.e., the integral area for the extrapolated baseline under the ce peak was 0.06 % ofRalpha). No obvious correlation between the observed magnitudes ofkZEand quenching could be found. The estimated standard uncertainty on the central value of 1.0006 was taken to be +/-0.0003 (i.e., +/-0.03 % on a relative basis). There is an additional uncertainty, estimated to be +/-0.05 %, for extrapolation to zero pulse height. The relative combined standard uncertainty inkZEis thus taken to be +/- 0.06 %, such thatkZE= 1.0006+/-0.0006. The second correction factor,kEC= 0.9988 +/- 0.0006, is for the contribution to the LS response from radiations that arise from the209Po EC decay. The above value was obtained from approximations given inAppendix A. The mean alpha emission rate concentration is thereforeAalpha= 85.42 s-1. g-1(as of the 1200 EST 15 March 1994 reference time). Assuming an alpha-decay branching ratio ofIalpha= 0.9952 +/- 0.0004 from Martin [11], the corresponding209Po activity concentration is 85.83 Bq . g-1. The relative combined standard uncertainty inAalphaisuc= +/-0.17 %. The relative expanded uncertainty, using a coverage factor ofk= 2, isU= +/- 0.34 % which is assumed to provide an uncertainty interval of 90 % to 95 % confidence. The component uncertainties used to obtain these estimates are outlined inTable 7. These component uncertainties are given in terms of their contribution to therelativestandard uncertainty inAalpha, i.e.,Nonefor each componentzNonehaving arelativeuncertainty estimate ofNone. Of necessity, some of the uncertainty components are difficult to quantify on a purely objective basis and are therefore based on subjective experiential estimates. Analyses, justifications, and underlying assumptions used to quantify all of the components follow. Component (a), the first inTable 7, is the LS measurement imprecision given by the relative standard deviation of the meansm= 0.012 % for the 536 independent determinations ofRalpha. It, of necessity, contains random variabilities (wholly or in part) from many component sources of inaccuracy: background subtraction variabilities, spectral integrations, LS cocktail stability, chemical quenching, timing errors, sample mass determinations, and decay corrections. For comparison, thesmfor 10 replicate measurements on a single given sample typically ranged from 0.05 % to 0.1 %; andsmfor all replicate measurements within a given sample series was typically +/- 0.05 % (seeTables 2through4). Component (b) is the uncertainty in meanAalphafor any given ampoule of the209Po solution standard. It was obtained from the standard deviation for the between-ampoule dispersion (see Sec. 2.10.1) and has nu = (7 ampoules-1) = 6 degrees of freedom. It also of necessity contains inherent random variabilities from other uncertainty components. Component (c) is an estimate of the uncertainty in the LS detection efficiency, and its variability with chemical quenching and over the observed system variations (for all of the variables of these measurements). The estimate was approximated in several ways. The first, call it (c1), was obtained by comparing the meanRalpha(mean) for all samples and measurements within a given sample series (and with a given LS spectrometer) to the extrapolated intercept value ofRalpha(ms= 0) (i.e., at zero sample mass) obtained from a regression ofRalphaas a function of sample massms(as inFigs. 11through13). Intercept values ofRalphaobtained from regressions with other sample composition variables (e.g.,paqorNaqofTable 1-which also could be used as measures of changes in chemical quenching) were statistically equivalent toRalpha(ms= 0) values. Six comparisons ofRalpha(mean) toRalpha(ms= 0), from the N, P, and Q sample series obtained with both LS counters, had differences ranging from -0.048 % to +0.10 %. The mean of the absolute values of the six differences was 0.037 % which may be taken as the component (c1) estimate of the relative standard uncertainty. The uncertainty on this uncertainty (reflected in the mean's sample (n= 6) standard deviation was ?90 % on a relative basis. Alternatively, the above range of 0.148 % may be multiplied by a coefficient of 0.9 (for an unbiased estimate of a standard deviation from the range of two observations) to obtain a second estimate, call it (c2), ofu?0.13 %. A third approach (c3) considers the difference (range) between the means of the most quenched and variable A and B sample series (after reduction by the known gravimetric dilution factor) and the meanAalphaobtained from then= 536 determinations data set (refer to Sec. 2.10.9 andTable 6). This difference yields, again after multiplying by 0.9, au(c3) estimate of 0.20 %. This estimate includes the uncertainty in the gravimetric dilution factor (?0.05 %). Lastly, foru(c4), one can consider the range inAalphaobtained from the difference in the maximum meanAalpha(with B series samples) to the minimum (Q series samples). There are either 9 or 18 mean values to consider in the range (seeTable 6) depending on if one does or does not average the sample series results across both instruments. In either case, multiplying the range by a coefficient of ?1/3 givesu(c4)?0.12 %. On considering these values foru(c1),u(c2),u(c3), andu(c4) from the four approaches, a relative standard uncertainty ofu(c)?0.12 % seems reasonable. It also seems reasonable that this uncertainty component has in turn a relative uncertainty of ?70 % (i.e., about 8 parts of 12 for the uncertainty on the uncertainty). The uncertainty in the LS detection efficiency must also be partially embodied in the uncertainty estimators for components (a) and (b) since the latter were obtained over a wide range of variables that might have influenced the efficiency. Component (d) was estimated from the combination of comparisons between the quench indicating parametersQIP(eitherHNoneortSIE) for the samples and matched blanks, and observed functional relationships between the blank counting rates (obtained over narrow time intervals) and theQIP. Data for the latter was obtained from a specially prepared series of 5 blanks having varying sample composition. The dependence of the blank counting rateRbas a function ofQIPwas generally defined in terms of a linear regression having a fitted slope of dRb/dQIP. The background rate was for all intensive purposes independent ofQIP. The fitted slopes were essentially zero with large inherent standard deviations: dRb/dQIP= 0.086 +/- 0.026 forHNoneand 0.0077 +/- 0.0086 fortSIE. For a difference DeltaQIPbetween a sampleQIPand that for its matched blank, the background counting rate difference DeltaRbdue to the mismatch is DeltaRb= DeltaQIP(dRb/dQIP). The relative standard uncertainty is then DeltaRb/Rband was typically a few tenths of a percent for DeltaQIPdifferences of +/- 1 unit ofHNoneor 5 to 10 units oftSIE. The resulting contribution of component (d) to the uncertainty inAalpha, requires consideration of the sensitivity factor: e.g.,u(d) = (?Aalpha/?Rb)(DeltaRb/Rb). The result, based on analyses of the P sample series on both LS counters wasu(d) = 0.0039 % with a 60 % relative uncertainty on this uncertainty (i.e., for the 10 determinations of DeltaRb/Rb. The variability in the background counting rates from measurement to measurement (i.e., component (e) uncertainty) was wholly embodied in the precision estimators for components (a) and (b). The uncertainty due to cocktail stability over the measurement time in so far as it affected the chemical quenching and alpha detection efficiency (component (f) inTable 7) was estimated by taking the variability in theQIP(as given by the standard deviationsNonedetermined from the multiple measurements of theQIPfor a given sample) and multiplying it by the known change dAalpha/dQIP(or its equivalent dRalpha/dQIP) inRalphaas a function ofQIPfor a given sample series. The estimatorsNoneis a measure of the variability inQIPover the measurement time. For example, a linear regression to theRalphaandHNonedata for the Q sample series had a fitted slope of dRalpha/dHNone= 0.0057 +/- 0.0029. For measurements of the same sample series, the relative standard deviation inHNonefor any sample ranged from 0.55 % to 0.80 %. The uncertainty in this case is then (dRalpha/dHNone)sNone, which has corresponding values of 0.0015 % at a lower bound and 0.0068 % at an upper bound. Analyses of five cases for the N, P, and Q series with both spectrometers resulted in an overall relative standard uncertainty ofu(f) = 0.0048 %. Again, as for the component (c) and (d) cases, the uncertainty in this uncertainty estimate is large, approaching 75 %. The relative uncertainty inQIPwassNone= 0.3 % to 0.9 %. Values of dRNone/dQIPranged from 0.0001 to 0.006 with accompanying relative uncertainties in dRNone/dQIPranging from 500 % to 50 %. One must further note that some part of the random variability in the cocktail stability must be included in all of the replicates making up the component (a) and (b) estimators. The LS detection efficiency varies slightly with sample volume and is at an optimal maximum (in these sample configurations) for volumes somewhere between 8 mL and 16 mL. The component (g) standard uncertainty estimate was obtained from comparing the differences in the meanAalphavalues obtained with samples havingmtot?10 g to 11 g and with that for samples havingmtot?14 g to 15 g. Part of the variability in LS efficiency due to sample volume must also be embodied in components (a) and (b). Other LS counting interferences (such as those arising from discharges of static electricity on the LS sample vials or in the LS counter; wall effects due to solvent diffusion into plastic vials; sample heterogeneity which results in differing efficiency in the various heterogeneous phases or components; and random electronic noise) are all sporadic in nature. These effects would increase the random variability in the measurement results. Considering the wide range of variables over which the measurements were obtained (with different types of LS vials, over widely varying sample composition, with different instruments and operating parameters, and at many different times over more than one year), the uncertainty in the LS efficiency due to these sporadically occurring interfering effects are considered to be wholly incorporated within the component (a) and (b) uncertainty estimators. For component (i), the uncertainty in live time determinations was estimated by assuming that the deadtime corrections that are automatically performed by the LS counters are appropriately made to within +/- 10 % (which is a reasonable assumption given the state of electronics for modern ADC-based counting instruments [29]) and on consideration of the counting rates of the LS samples and the known resolving times for the LS instruments (further assuming that the deadtime intervals are fixed). The relative uncertainties calculated on this basis were 0.01 % and 0.03 % in worst cases for the Packard and Beckman instruments, respectively. Given that roughly half of the total number of measurements ofRalphawere performed with each instrument, the relative standard uncertaintyu(i) was taken to be 0.02 %. The variability in LS sample mass measurements (component (j) uncertainty) is wholly embodied in the uncertainty estimators for components (a) and (b) in as much as the meanRalphawas based on 27 independent sample masses (with each mass determination having an independent confirmation - see Sec. 2.2.3). For component (k), the estimated relative standard uncertainty in the gravimetric determination for any one LS sample is 0.05 % and was treatedin extensoin Sec. 2.2.3. The relative standard uncertainties in the two correctionskZEandkECc (for the (1) and (m) components) were respectively addressed in Sec. 2.10.2 andAppendix A. Timing uncertainties were negligible considering the long half-lives involved in these measurements. For a timing error of 1 min (which is almost inconceivable), the relative uncertainty in the209Po decay correction is less than 1.3*10-6%. Also, any timing variabilities would certainly have been averaged out over the 536 measurements contained in components (a) and (b). For components (o), (p), and (q), the uncertainties in the corrections for209Po decay and the208Po impurity (with its respective decay) were derived assuming relative uncertainties ofu(lambda209Pomicron) = 4.9 %,u(lambda208Pomicron) = 0.069 %, andu(I) = 8.1 %. The uncertainties in the decay constants lambda were obtained from the Evaluated Nuclear Structure Data File [30] while that for the208Po to209Po alpha-emission rate impurity ratio .I was given in Sec. 2.9. The meanRalphawas obtained from determinations separated by more than a year (with all determinations decay and impurity corrected to an identical reference time). Hence, the magnitude of the corrections (and hence their uncertainties) are quite disparate. The 1993 LS measurement results were corrected for decay times from 0.7 yr to just over 1 yr whereas those obtained in 1994 were at most only corrected over times of a few weeks ( less than 0.04 yr). One may therefore consider the ranges of uncertainty values over these decay times. For decay times ranging fromT?0.04 yr to ?1 yr (see equations in Sec. 2.4.1), the propagated relative uncertainty in the209Po decay correction ranges from 0.0013 % to 0.033 %. A mid-value ofu(o)?0.02 % may thus be used as an estimate of the standard uncertainty for this component. Similarly, the correction for the208Po impurity over this same time interval ranges from aboutu(p)?0.01 % to 0.008 %. The uncertainty contribution from208Po decay is negligible with an estimated relative uncertainty component ofu(q)?8*10-7% forT?0.04 yr to less than 2*10-5% forT?1 yr. The inherent random variabilities in these three corrections are also of necessity partially embodied in the uncertainty estimators for components (a) and (b). The treatment used to propagate these components into a combined standard uncertainty and an "overall" expanded uncertainty was outlined in Sec. 2.1.4. One should also recall that the data set of 536Ralphavalues that largely comprise these uncertainties was shown to be normally distributed (Sec. 2.10.2). The prepared and calibrated209Po solution standard will be certified and disseminated as NIST SRM 4326 with the following specifications:NoneNoneNoneNoneNoneNoneThe calibration was based on 4pialpha LS spectrometry using two LS measurement systems, with confirmatory measurements by 2pialpha gas-flow proportional counting. The mean alpha emission rate concentration was derived from 536 independent determinations of the LS counting rate, using 27 counting sources (of widely varying chemical quenching and sample composition) that were in turn obtained from 7 randomly selected sealed ampoules of the209Po solution standard. The determinations were performed over a long (?1 yr) time interval. Photon-and alpha-emission impurity analyses were conducted by gamma-ray spectrometry with two intrinsic Ge detectors for the former, and by alpha spectrometry with a Si surface-barrier junction detector for the latter. Form: Solution of nominal 2 mol . L-1HCl in a flame-sealed NIST 5 mL borosilicate glass ampouleSolution mass: (5.1597 +/- 0.0024) gSolution density: (1.031 +/- 0.004) g . mL-1at 22 degrees CAlpha emission rate concentration: (85.42 +/-0.29) s-1. g-1Known radionuclidic (alpha emission) impurities: (0.106 +/- 0.017) s-1. g-1from208PoReference time: 1200 EST 15 March 1994The 4pialpha LS-measurement calibration of209Po (a nearly pure alpha emitter) would have been routinely straightforward otherwise, but was confounded by the existence of a low-energy level in205Pb (fed by the alpha decay of209Po) that was previously unknown to be a long-lived isomeric state. This finding (or more accurately, its converse) required the exhaustive LS spectral investigations that were performed as well as the large number of LS measurements that were conducted with large variations in chemical quenching and sample composition conditions. We may ultimately conclude by noting that this work is reported here in such depth and exacting detail for two reasons. Firstly, because of the complexity of this calibration; and secondly, and perhaps more importantly, to provide a documented and archival record of some of the radionuclidic metrology procedures routinely practiced by the NIST Radioactivity Group.