Practical strategies to reduce the harmful sequelae of the worldwide obesity epidemic are paramount for reducing the future medical burden to society. There is abundant evidence linking obesity to the overall risk for several cancers including endometrial, colorectal, prostate, pancreatic and postmenopausal breast cancerNone,None,None,None,None. Furthermore, in breast cancer obesity is associated with a higher incidence of more aggressive triple negative breast tumors and reduced survival, regardless of menopausal statusNone. Why obesity increases cancer risk is not known but it is thought to be related to increased tissue inflammation, insulin resistance, and/or hyperinsulinemia. Thus, dietary intervention is a potential means to mitigate this risk. Altering the balance between dietary omega-3 (omega-3) and omega-6 polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) has received considerable attention as an approach for disease preventionNone,Noneand several epidemiological and preclinical studies have suggested an anti-tumor effect of omega-3 PUFAs on breast cancerNone,None,None. The complex mechanisms by which omega-3 PUFAs, particularly eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), exert their anticancer effects are not well understood although multiple targets regulating cell proliferation, cell survival, inflammation, angiogenesis and metastasis may be involvedNone. We have shown that the G protein-coupled receptor 120 (GPR120) is a functional omega-3 PUFA receptor that mediates potent insulin sensitizing and anti-diabetic effectsin vivoby repressing macrophage-induced adipose tissue inflammation in obese miceNone. The state of chronic, low grade inflammation arising in obesity is characterized by infiltration of M1-type adipose tissue macrophages (ATMs), cells that secrete high levels of proinflammatory cytokines, TNF-alpha, IL1beta and IL-6 and are considered to be major contributors to tissue inflammation and insulin resistance in obesityNone,None. In breast cancer patients, increased circulating TNF-alpha levels are positively correlated with tumor cell proliferation, tumor stage and lymph node metastasisNone,None. Since TNF-alpha signals through the JNK and NFkappaB pathways and omega-3 PUFAs can inhibit these pathways by sequestering TAB1 in obese miceNone, we tested whether obesity induced inflammation could be ameliorated by omega-3 PUFAs in a postmenopausal breast cancer model. We have used orthotopic injection of the Py230 breast cancer cell line into syngeneic ovariectomized (OVX), immune-competent mice to demonstrate that obesity, induced either by high-fat diet (HFD) or genetically, increases inflammation in the mammary fat pad and concurrently promotes mammary tumor growth. While omega-3 PUFAs reduced inflammation in the mammary fat pad in the absence of tumor cell injection, they inhibited mammary tumor growth independent of inflammation and GPR120 expression in the mammary fat pad. We demonstrate that DHA inhibits Py230 mammary tumor cell growth directly via induction of apoptosisin vitro. Our results suggest that further investigation into the mechanisms by which omega-3 PUFAs can impact breast cancer is warranted. We first examined tumor progression in HFD-induced or genetically obese OVX mice to address whether the origin of the obesity plays a role in the promotion of postmenopausal breast cancer. As expected and consistent with previous reportsNone,None, HFD feeding led to body weight gain and increased mammary fat pad weight in both wild type (WT) and ob/+ heterozygous (Het) mice compared to their normal chow (NC)-fed counterparts (Figure 1AandFigure S1). NC-fed ob/ob mice, which are hyperphagic from birth due to a homozygous mutation in the leptin gene, had significantly greater body weights than either WT or Het mice fed HFD, and their body weights were further increased by HFD-feeding (Figure 1A). We assessed mammary tumor growth in these mouse groups seven weeks after injection of Py230 tumor cells (Figure 1B). HFD significantly increased tumor burden in WT and Het mice compared to NC (51% and 63% respectively). Obese ob/ob mice fed NC showed tumor growth equivalent to that observed in WT and Het mice fed HFD and the HFD feeding did not significantly increase tumor burden in the ob/ob mice (Figure 1B). Regression analysis of tumor weight versus body weight revealed that the mammary tumor burden was positively correlated with body weight across all strains and diets (r= 0.522, p less than 0.001,Figure 1C). These data indicate that obesity, whether induced by HFD feeding or leptin deficiency, significantly increases mammary tumor growth and validate this OVX mouse model for translational postmenopausal breast cancer studies. Inflammation is a potential link between obesity and breast cancerNone,None,None. To interrogate the role of inflammation in mammary tumor growth, we examined macrophage infiltration, macrophage polarization and cytokine gene expression in the mammary fat pad. Obesity in mice, regardless of its origin, induced significantly greater M1-type, proinflammatory macrophage infiltration in the mammary fat pad compared to lean controls, as determined by flow cytometry assessment of F4/80+CD11b+CD11c+expression (Figure 2A). Data compiled across all the mouse groups indicated a consistent 3-4-fold increase in proinflammatory M1-type macrophages in obese mice compared to lean mice (Figure 2B). This infiltration was highly correlated with mouse body weight (r= 0.746, p less than 0.001,Figure 2C). The proinflammatory nature of the infiltrating macrophages was confirmed by real time PCR analysis showing significantly higher expression of M1-type macrophage associated proinflammatory genesCcl2(monocyte chemotactic protein, MCP-1) andTnfin obese relative to lean mice (Figure 2D). No significant difference was observed in the expression of several other M1-type macrophage associated proinflammatory genes,Il1b(IL-1beta),Il6(IL-6), andNos2(iNOS) (Figure S2). Obesity did not result in any significant difference in expression of M2-type macrophage associated anti-inflammatory genes such asArg1(arginase 1, Arg-1) andClec10a(macrophage galactose-type C-type lectin 1, MGL-1) in the mammary fat pad (Figure S3). Expression of the inflammatory mediators keratinocyte-derived chemokine (KC/Cxcl1) MCP-1, IL-1beta, IL-6 and TNF-alpha was evaluated in mammary tumor extracts using a cytokine multiplex assay. There was no significant difference between lean and obese mice (Figure S4), demonstrating that obesity increases inflammation in the mammary fat pad but not in mammary tumors in our model. Furthermore, analysis of hematoxylin and eosin (H E) and F4/80 stained sections of the tumors revealed neither significant morphological changes nor differences in macrophage infiltration between tumors from lean or obese mice (data not shown). Since we observed significantly increased TNFalpha and MCP-1 gene expression in the obese mammary fat pad, we examined the effects of TNFalpha and MCP-1 on Py230 cell growthin vitro. TNFalpha dose-dependently stimulated Py230 cell proliferation from day 6 post-treatment onwards, but MCP-1 had no effect (Figure 3A). The TNF Receptor (TNFR) signals via the NFkappaB and JNK pathways so we tested the involvement of these pathways in the proliferative response. Inhibition of the JNK pathway with SP600125 reduced the basal proliferation of the Py230 cells and eliminated the enhanced proliferation with TNFalpha (Figure 3B). In contrast, inhibition of the NFkappaB pathway with JSH-23 reduced the basal proliferation but had no effect on the TNFalpha-promoted proliferation (Figure 3B). Treatment of Py230 cells with TNF-alpha caused an increase in JNK, TAK1 and IKKalpha/beta phosphorylation and degradation of IkappaBalpha, suggesting that JNK and NFkappaB signaling are activated in response to TNF-alpha in Py230 cells (Figure 3C). Together, these results suggest that TNF-alpha production in the mammary fat pad of obese mice may play a direct role in tumor growth by stimulating tumor cell proliferation. mega-3 PUFAs signaling via GPR120 and Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) utilize the same NFkappaB and JNK pathways as TNFalpha so they could potentially interfere with these proliferative signalsNone,None. Among dietary fat subtypes, omega-3 PUFAs offer the most promise for reducing the risk of carcinogenesisNone,None. So we tested whether HFD supplementation with omega-3 PUFAs derived from fish oil (FOD, fish oil diet) could reduce inflammation in the mammary and perigonadal fat pads of obese OVX mice in the absence of tumor formation. Mice were fed normal HFD or an isocaloric HFD containing 24% DHA and 6% EPA (FOD). In perigonadal fat tissue, FOD-fed OVX female mice showed reduced expression of macrophage marker genes (F4/80 and CD11c) and M1-type macrophage proinflammatory mediator genes such as MCP-1 and TNF-alpha compared to HFD-fed mice (Figure 4A), as we had previously observed in epididymal adipose tissue from male miceNone. In contrast to our previous findings in epididymal adipose tissue from male mice, IL-6 expression was increased and IL-1beta and iNOS expression was not altered in the current studies (Figure 4A). In addition, FOD-fed mice tended to increase expression of Arg-1 but significantly decrease expression of macrophage mannose receptor 1 (MMR/Mrc1) compared to HFD-fed mice, showing mixed results for M2-type macrophage anti-inflammatory genes (Figure 4A). Inflammation in the mammary fat pad was also significantly decreased by omega-3 PUFAs. FOD-fed mice showed a significant reduction of F4/80, CD11c, MCP-1, TNF-alpha and MMR gene expression in the mammary fat pad whereas IL-6 and Arg-1 gene expression was significantly increased compared to HFD-fed mice (Figure 4B). These data indicate omega-3 PUFAs can reduce inflammation in both the perigonadal and mammary fat depots of obese OVX mice in the absence of tumor cells. Since our HFD studies suggested that inflammation in the mammary fat pad was driving tumor progression and the FOD reduced mammary fat pad inflammation, we hypothesized that a FOD would reduce Py230 tumor growth. Indeed, FOD-fed mice had a significantly reduced mammary tumor burden (28%) compared to HFD-fed mice of equivalent weight (Figure 5AandFigure S5). As we observed in our initial HFD study (Figure S4), the FOD did not alter gene expression of macrophage markers or inflammatory mediator such as TNF-alpha, iNOS, MCP-1, IL-1beta, IL-6, Arg-1 and MMR in mammary tumors (Figure S6). We observed no difference in GPR120 gene expression in mammary tumors between HFD- and FOD-fed mice (Figure 5B) but GPR120 expression was significantly higher in the mammary fat pad compared to mammary tumors from HFD-fed mice (Figure 5B). Unexpectedly and unlike the mammary fat pads of naive mice (Figure 4B), the mammary fat pads of tumor-bearing mice did not show significant differences in macrophage marker or inflammatory cytokine gene expression on the FOD compared to the HFD-fed mice (Figure 5C), and, indeed, some markers tended to increase, suggesting that the presence of tumor cells modulates the effect of the FOD in the mammary fat depot. The FOD did have its expected effect to reduce inflammation in perigonadal fat, however,as expression of F4/80, CD11c and TNF-alpha tended to be lower (Figure 5D). Due to the discrepant results with inflammatory markers between naive and tumor bearing mice, we performed a direct comparison of these markers in the mammary fat pad and perigonadal fat in uninjected obese mice or in tumor-cell injected obese mice. In HFD-fed mice, tumor cell injection significantly increased F4/80, CD11c and IL-1beta gene expression and decreased TNF-alpha expression and tended to decrease IL-6 expression in the mammary fat pad (Figure 5E), but did not in perigonadal fat where IL-1beta and IL-6 were significantly increased (Figure 5F). We have shown that a FOD reduces obesity-induced inflammation in adipose tissues from male mice via GPR120-mediated signaling and improves metabolic defects in these miceNone. Since we showed that the FOD could reduce tumor burden but paradoxically not inflammation in tumor bearing mice, we wondered whether GPR120 mediates the tumor inhibitory effect of FOD as we had previously seen for the anti-inflammatory effect in male mice. To directly test this hypothesis, we injected GPR120 positive Py230 tumor cells into the mammary fat pad of GPR120 knock out (KO) mice. The KO mice, fed FOD for nine weeks prior to tumor cell injection, showed significantly reduced mammary tumor burden (38%) compared to HFD-fed KO mice (Figure 5G), demonstrating that contrary to our hypothesis, GPR120 expression in the mammary fat pad was not essential for the inhibitory effect of the FOD on mammary tumor growth. Since the FOD did not alter inflammation in the mammary tumors themselves (Figure S4) we tested whether a FOD could inhibit mammary tumor progression by decreasing cell proliferation and/or increasing apoptosis in tumors. Ki-67 and TUNEL immunohistochemical staining of mammary tumors revealed a high degree of variability in cell proliferation and apoptosis between tumors and no significant differences were observed between mice fed with a HFD or FOD (data not shown). Relatively small changes in cell growth or apoptosis occurringin vivoover time are difficult to measure, so we examined whether omega-3 PUFAs, specifically DHA, could act directly on Py230 tumor cells to reduce mammary tumor cell growthin vitro. DHA significantly inhibited Py230 cell growth in a dose-dependent manner (Figure 6A). This DHA-induced cell growth inhibition was also observed in GPR120 KO cells derived from tumors of double transgenic PyVmT/GPR120 KO mice (Figure 6A), indicating that DHA inhibits Py230 tumor cell growth independent of GPR120 signaling in agreement with ourin vivotumor growth studies (Figure 5G). In addition, DHA pre-treatment inhibited TNF-alpha-induced Py230 cell growth (Figure 6B) and blocked NF-kappaB activation and nuclear translocation stimulated by either TNF-alpha or LPS in Py230 cells (Figure 6CandFigure S7). Interestingly, DHA treatment itself induced robust JNK phosphorylation, which was maintained after subsequent TNF-alpha or LPS treatment (Figure 6C). DHA also increased the activities of caspases 3 and 7 and induced apoptosis in Py230 cells (Figure 6D and 6E). Our results suggest that omega-3 PUFAs may suppress mammary tumor growth by directly inhibiting the growth of mammary tumor cells via induction of apoptosis. As activated JNK signaling suppresses insulin signaling in the context of inflammationNone,None, we tested whether DHA-induced JNK activation in Py230 cells inhibits insulin signaling through AKT. Py230 cells showed high basal AKT phosphorylation, which was not increased by insulin stimulation. DHA treatment significantly increased JNK phosphorylation as we had observed earlier and inhibited both basal and insulin-stimulated AKT phosphorylation (Figure 6F). We have shown that obesity in OVX mice, whether driven by HFD or leptin deficiency, increased macrophage infiltration and inflammation in mammary fat pads and increased growth of orthotopically injected Py230 tumor cells in concordance with other studies examining obesity, inflammation and cancerNone,None,None. We observed that omega-3 PUFA supplementation reduced obesity-associated adipose tissue inflammation in tumor naive mice but not in tumor bearing mice. Omega-3 PUFA supplementation reduced mammary tumor growth in obese mice and this effect was independent of inflammation or the expression of GPR120 in the host mammary fat pad. TNF-alpha expression was highly increased in the obese OVX mouse mammary fat pad and we showed that TNF-alpha stimulates Py230 cell proliferationin vitroin a pathway requiring JNK activation. Treatment of Py230 cells with omega-3 PUFA DHA strongly activates JNK, triggering apoptosis and inhibiting the ability of TNF-alpha to stimulate proliferation. Together, our studies show that TNF-alpha stimulates Py230 tumor cell proliferation by a mechanism where JNK activation is necessary but not sufficient and where the non-JNK signaling components of TNF-alpha-induced tumor cell proliferation are blocked by DHA. Such non-JNK targets are interesting for future study. We also made the interesting observation that the presence of tumor cells increases the macrophage content and modulates the inflammatory environment of the mammary fat pad but eliminates the anti-inflammatory effects of omega-3 PUFA. Numerous studies have demonstrated beneficial, inflammatory disease-modulating effects of omega-3 PUFAs, especially EPA and DHA, that result from decreased inflammatory cytokines and lipid mediators such as prostaglandins, leukotrienes, resolvins and protectinsNone,None. Epidemiological studies have found that increased omega-3 PUFAs intake is associated with reduced breast cancer risk in humans, particularly in postmenopausal womenNone,None,Nonesuggesting a common link between breast cancer and inflammation-related disease risk. However, the majority of mechanistic animal and cell culture model studies of breast cancer show that the protective effect of omega-3 PUFAs is mediated via suppression of cell proliferation or angiogenesis, or an increase in apoptosisNone,None,None,None. Some of the anti-inflammatory effects of omega-3 PUFAs are mediated by GPR120 and, indeed, we have previously shown that all anti-inflammatory effects are lost in obese male GPR120 KO miceNone. Not all actions of GPR120 are beneficial, however. A recent study showed that GPR120 expression was significantly induced in human colorectal tissues and cell lines and activation of GPR120 in colorectal cells promoted angiogenesis and tumor growthin vivo, suggesting that GPR120 can function as a tumor promoting receptor in colorectal cancerNone. We observed that GPR120 expression is much lower in tumors compared to the surrounding mammary fat pad in our breast cancer model, so this discrepancy could be due to specific cancer types (colorectal vs breast) or different species (human and mice). Our studies indicate that GPR120 functions neither to inhibit mammary tumor progression by modulating stromal, mammary adipose tissue inflammation, nor to directly inhibit tumor cell proliferation. Additional studies are necessary to elucidate whether GPR120 plays any role in the development and progression of breast cancer. Since we observed omega-3 PUFAs inhibit mammary tumor growth and Py230 tumor cell growthin vitroindependent of GPR120 signaling, we speculate that this omega-3 PUFA effect may be mediated through TLR4, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPARs), or other G protein coupled receptors (GPRs) and this will be studied in the future. Additional studies are necessary to investigate the underlying signaling pathways involved in DHA induced JNK signaling activation and test whether JNK activation by DHA is required for DHA's mammary tumor inhibitory properties. In summary, our results suggest that omega-3 PUFAs may suppress mammary tumor growth by directly inhibiting the growth of mammary tumor cells via induction of apoptotic pathways. Further study is needed to clarify the mechanism of action of omega-3 PUFAs and identify new therapeutic targets for obese postmenopausal women with breast cancer. DHA was obtained from Cayman Chemical (Ann Harbor, MI). F12K nutrient medium was obtained from Mediatech, Inc (Manassas, VA) and fetal calf serum (FCS), gentamycin, fungizone from Invitrogen (Carlsbad, CA) and MITO Plus serum extender were obtained from BD Bioscience (San Jose, CA). SP600-125 (JNK inhibitor), JSH-23 (NFkappaB inhibitor) and LPS were obtained from Sigma Chemical (St. Louis, MO). Recombinant mouse TNF-alpha and MCP-1were obtained from BioLegend (San Diego, CA). WT, heterozygous (+/ob, Het) and ob/ob female C57BL/6J mice were purchased and OVX at 6 weeks of age in the Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, ME). WT C57BL/6J and littermate GPR120 KO mice were OVX at 7-8 weeks of age. Mice were fed either NC [12% kcal from fat; Purina 5001, LabDiet (St. Louis, MO)], HFD [60% kcal from fat; D12492, Research Diets (New Brunswick, NJ)] or an isocaloric HFD containing 30% omega-3 PUFAs replacement (FOD; wt/wt; 24% DHA, 6% EPA, Research Diets). Animals were maintained on a 12-h/12-h light/dark cycle with free access to food and water. All animal procedures were in accordance with University of California San Diego research guidelines for the care and use of laboratory animals. Py230 tumor cells derived from a PyVmT/C57BL6 mouse were used for orthotopic inoculation into the mammary fat pad of miceNone. One hundred thousand cells re-suspended in 2 mg/ml matrigel/PBS (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) solution were injected into the right and left thoracic and inguinal mammary fat pads using a 30 gauge needle. To monitor tumor growth in the mammary fat pad, Py230 tumor cell injected mammary glands were examined by finger palpation. Mammary tumor growth was determined by tumor weights. The mammary fat pads, tumors and perigonadal fat were excised, weighed and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen for further studies. Portions of tumors were fixed in 10% buffered formalin for histological analysis. Portions of fat pads were placed in ice cold PBS for the isolation of the stromal vascular cell (SVC) fraction and FACS analysis. Mammary fat pads were weighed, rinsed in PBS, and minced in FACS buffer (1% low endotoxin bovine serum albumin in PBS). SVCs were prepared from collagenase (Sigma) digested fat pads and FACS analysis of SVCs for macrophage content and subtypes were performed as previously describedNone. Briefly, SVCs were incubated with Fc block (e-Bioscience, San Diego, CA) for 20 min on ice before staining with fluorescently labeled primary antibodies for 30 min on ice. APC-F4/80 FACS antibody (AbD Serotech, Raleigh, NC), FITC-CD11b and PE-CD11c FACS antibodies (BD Biosciences) were used. Cells were gently washed and resuspended in FACS buffer with propidium iodide (Sigma). SVCs were analyzed by a FACSCalibur with CELLQUEST acquisition and analysis software (BD Bioscience). Unstained, single fluorescence stained and fluorescence minus one stained controls were used for setting compensation and gates. Total RNA was isolated from mammary fat pads, tumors and perigonadal fat using the Trizol reagent (Invitrogen). First-strand cDNA was synthesized using a MMLV-Reverse Transcriptase and random hexamers (Promega, Madison, MI) and amplified using primers listed inNone. qPCR was performed using an iTaq Universal SYBR Green Supermix (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA) on Step One Plus Real time PCR system (Applied Biosystems, Grand Island, NY). Gene expression levels were calculated after normalization to the standard housekeeping genesRNA polymerase II (RP II)andGlyceraldehyde 3 phospate dehydrogenase (GAPDH)using the DeltaDeltaCTmethod and expressed as relative mRNA level compared with internal control. Py230 cells, a clonal cell line derived from a PyVmT tumor and GPR120 KO cells derived from a PyVmT/GPR120 KO tumor were maintained in F12K nutrient medium supplemented with 5% (v/v) FCS, 50 mug/ml gentamycin, 2.5 mug/ml fungizone and MITO+ serum extender (1:1000) at 37 C under 5% CO2. The cell viability assay and apoptosis assay with treatment of vehicle or DHA were performed in F12K nutrient medium supplemented with 2% (v/v) FCS, 50 mug/ml gentamycin and 2.5 mug/ml fungizone. The MTT [3-(4.5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenylt3etrazodium bromide] assay was used. Py230 cells were seeded in 96-well plates. The 100 mM stock solution of DHA (dissolved in 200-proof ethanol) was diluted in ethanol first and then in the culture medium immediately at the desired final concentrations before adding to each well for 48hr. The cells were washed once in PBS and 100 mul of MTT (0.5 mg/ml) was added to each well at a final concentration of 50 mug/ml for 3 hours. After incubation the MTT was removed, 100 mul of acidic isopropanol (30 mul of 12 M HCl in 10 ml) was added, and the absorbance was read with a Spectromax 190 microplate reader (Molecular Devices, Sunnyvale, CA) at 560 nm. Cells and tissues were washed with cold PBS on ice and treated with RIPA lysis buffer (Millipore, Temecular, CA) containing a cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail tablet (Roche, Madison, MI) and a PhosSTOP phosphotase inhibitor cocktail tablet (Roche, Madison, MI). The protein amount was determined using the Bio-Rad protein assay (Bio-Rad). After an equal amount of protein was loaded in each lane, they were separated by 10% (w/v) SDS-PAGE and then transferred to an Immobilon-P PVDF membrane (Millipore). Target proteins were immunodetected using specific primary antibodies and the horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated anti-rabbit or anti-mouse IgG (Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories, West Grove, CA) was used as a secondary antibody. Positive bands were detected using the Supersignal Westpico Chemiluminescent Substrate (Thermo Scientific, Pittsburgh, PA). Antibodies for p-TAK1, TAK, p-IKK alpha/beta, IkB-alpha, p-JNK, JNK and AKT were obtained from Cell Signaling Technology (Boston, MA), antibodies for p-AKT and HSP90alpha/beta were from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Santa Cruz, CA) and the antibody for GPR120 was from Novus Biologicals (Littleton, CO). The staining was done in cells cultured on coverslips in a 6 well plate. Briefly, cells were fixed in 4% formaldehyde in PBS, blocked with 5% normal goat serum, incubated with rabbit anti-NFkappaB p65 antibody (Cell signaling) followed by incubation with the Alexa Fluor 546 goat anti-rabbit antibody (Invitrogen) and mounted with Vectashield mounting medium with DAPI (Vector laboratories Inc., Burlingame, CA). The slides were examined under a fluorescence microscope. Caspase-Glo 3/7 assay Following DHA treatment cells were subjected to Caspase 3 and 7 activity measurements using the Caspase-Glo assay kit (Promega). Briefly, a 96 well plate containing cells was removed from the incubator and allowed to equilibrate to room temperature for 30 minutes. 100 mul of Caspase-Glo reagent was added to each well and gently mixed with a plate shaker at 300-500 rpm for 30 seconds. The plate was then incubated at room temperature for 2 hours. The luminescence of each sample was measured in a plate-reading luminometer. The experiments were performed in triplicate and repeated on two separately initiated cultures. FITC Annexin V apoptosis assay: Following DHA treatment cells were harvested and then stained with FITC Annexin V and Propidium iodide using the FITC Annexin V Apoptosis Detection Kit I (BD Biosciences) and following the manufacturer's protocol. The percentage of apoptotic cells was quantified by FACSCalibur Flow Cytometry (BD Biosciences). Data are presented as mean +/- SEM. Differences between two groups was evaluated using Student's t-test and between multiple groups using analysis of variance followed by Bonferroni's, Tukey's or Dunnett's multiple comparisons post hoc tests. Tumor data were not normally distributed and were analyzed by the Kruskal-Wallis test followed by Dunn's multiple comparisons test or, in the case of a single comparison by the Mann-Whitney test. Tumor data are reported as box-whisker plots indicating the median, the first and third quartiles, and the 10thand 90thpercentile. Pearson's correlation analysis was performed to test the association between body weight and tumor growth as well as between body weight and proinflammatory macrophage infiltration in the mammary fat pad. Apvalue less than 0.05 was considered significant.