Cold temperatures and adrenergic agonists can stimulate the formation of multilocular brown adipocytes in white adipose depots1. These new brown adipocytes, referred to as 'beige' or 'brite' adipocytes, dissipate heat and consume glucose and fatty acids23. Because of these attributes, beige adipocytes hold therapeutic potential to combat obesity and diabetes4. However, the source of beige adipocytes remains controversial and transdifferentiation of unilocular white adipocytes to multilocular beige adipocytes has been a conventional notion56. This is exemplified in recent work of Granneman and colleagues7, indicating that cells marked by Adiponectin-CreERT2; red fluorescent protein (RFP), which include white adipocytes, can fate map into beige adipocytes after cold exposure. In contrast, work by Scherer and colleagues8and work from others have suggested a different source; some imply a myogenic ancestry910. Another alternative may be smooth muscle-like progenitors that express myosin heavy chain 11 (Myh11), suggested by a recent cell marking/fate-mapping study by Spiegelman and colleagues11. Granneman and colleagues12have also identified a perivascular platelet-derived growth factor receptor-alpha (PDGFRalpha)-positive cell as a possible source for beta3 agonist-induced beige adipocytes. These studies resonate with previous proposals of a mural cell (for example, vascular smooth muscle cells and pericytes) origin for white adipose progenitors, pointing to potential commonality between white and beige adipocyte provenance1314. Yet, Sidossis and Kajimura15recently highlighted thatin lieuof seminal fate-mapping studies, the origin(s) of beige adipocytes is not well defined and many pieces to the puzzle are missing such as age, gender and location within the adipose depot where beige adipocytes form at room temperature and after cold exposure. These obscurities are critical roadblocks to manipulating these cellular furnaces for therapeutic ends. The Cre/loxP site-specific recombination system has provided insight into tissue development, homeostasis and function16. Although 'straight' Cre drivers can be useful, they are limited for fate mapping and progenitor identification, because it is difficult to know when and where the actions of the Cre driver occurred17. To ascertain this information requires an extensive search, throughout development and adulthood, to delineate the temporal and spatial expression pattern of the Cre driver. Another concern of straight Cre marking is that the Cre allele can be continually expressed or functional, and also that its expression can be activated during the differentiation process of the cell type of interest, masking progenitorship18. Together with the other issues, this often undermines the use of straight Cre strains for fate mapping. These issues have in part been overcome by modifications that provide temporal precision, such as the tamoxifen (TM)-inducible CreER/ERT2or the inducible/suppressible Tet systems1920. These inducible tools are just transiently active, principally during the period in which the inducers such as doxycycline (Dox) or TM are administered1920. During this window, Cre is active and reporter expression is turned on, presumably only in Cre-expressing cells that can be scored and sometimes in a relatively straightforward manner. After induction and chase, reporter marking can be present in potential descendants, providing insight into lineage and fate1921. Mice that contain such inducible genetic tools have allowed scientists to identify stem cells/progenitors and to delineate the roles of these cells in tissue development, homeostasis and function1422. Here we examined various straight Cre (Myf5-Cre, Myogenin-Cre and SM22-Cre) and inducible Cre (AdipoTrak-tTA-TRE-Cre,Adiponectin-CreNone,aP2-CreNone,Myh11-CreNone,NG2-CreNone,PDGFRalpha-CreNone,SMA-CreNone,SMA-rtTA-TRE-CreandUCP1-CreNone) mouse strains, integrating an indelible Cre-dependent Rosa26RRFPallele, to attempt to fate map beige progenitors and beiging in response to cold stimuli. We found that SMA-CreERT2- and SMA-rtTA-driven reporters and endogenous smooth muscle actin (SMA) were expressed in mural cells in all white adipose depots. Endogenous SMA expression was not detected in mature white or beige adipocytes, or other cells in the depots, and the SMA reporters mirrored that pattern at room temperature (RT) pulse. However, cold exposure triggered an evolution of SMA-dependent reporter expression and fate mapping was present in ?60-80% of cold-induced uncoupling protein 1 (UCP1)-positive multilocular beige adipocytes in subcutaneous and visceral adipose depots. This high percentage fate mapping was supported in necessity tests; SMA mural-resident progenitors appeared essential for cold-induced beiging and the resultant mice had impaired physiological and metabolic responses to cold temperatures. SMA-based tools may therefore be useful to track and manipulate beige adipocyte development, formation and function, as well as metabolism. We analysed a variety of genetically modified mice that express Cre or inducible/suppressible forms of Cre in adipose, muscle and mural cell lineages for the potential to mark cold-induced beige adipocytes in either subcutaneous inguinal or visceral perigonadal adipose depots. To visualize Cre-dependent marking, we incorporated an indelibleRosa26RNone(tdTomato) reporter allele that expresses RFP in Cre-expressing cells and in potential descendants23. RFP is well suited for cell-fate studies, as it is quite sensitive, can be directly visualized with fluorescence microscopy and is convenient for immunohistochemistry (IHC) and flow cytometry (quantification and isolation)14. We performed experiments on 2-month-old Cre- or CreERT2-Rosa26RNonemarking mice that were randomly housed for 7 days in either cold temperature (6 degrees C), to induce the beiging phenomena, or RT (23 degrees C), to serve as a control (Fig. 1a). To determine whether cold exposure induced beige adipocytes derived from a Cre-marked source, we examined RFP fluorescence either from intact depots or from histological sections, the latter combined withUCP1IHC to help define beige adipocytes2425. Our rational for whole depot imaging was to provide an overview of potential effects and to assess whether reporter expression might, for example, show a cold-induced evolution from vascular marking into new adipose tissue expression, as such a change may indicate that the marked cells were an origin for the beige phenomena. Beiging was less prominent in visceral perigonadal adipose depots, consistent with many scientists' observations681226, but cold exposure did induce the formation of small islands of beige adipocytes within this depot from male mice. To attempt to probe the adipose mural compartment and existing white adipocytes, two candidates for beige origin, we examinedAdipoTrak;RFP(PPARgammaNone; TRE-Cre; Rosa26RNone) mice13142728. TheAdipoTraksystem marks the entire white adipose lineage including mural resident progenitors and white adipocytes. Consistent with reports13142728,AdipoTrak;RFPmarked the adipose-mural vasculature and apparently 100% of white unilocular adipocytes within the inguinal and perigonadal adipose depots, both in whole depot images and in histological sections at both cold temperature and RT (Fig. 1b,candSupplementary Fig. 1a,b). In histological sections of cold-exposedAdipoTrak; RFPmice, 100% ofUCP1+ multilocular beige adipocytes appeared RFP+ in inguinal and perigonadal depots (Fig. 1candSupplementary Fig. 1b). To attempt to probe the mural compartment in a more restricted manner, we turned toAdipoTrak; GFP(PPARgammaNone; TRE-H2B-GFP) mice in which the green fluorescent protein (GFP) is incorporated into the chromatin of proliferating cells such as the mural cells and not into postmitotic cells such as existing white adipocytes. Nevertheless, GFP will be detected in the nuclei of adipocytes if they differentiate from a GFP-marked mural source1327. We treatedAdipoTrak; GFPmice with Dox, to suppress the tTA system, from conception until they reached 2 months of age. We then removed Dox for 2 weeks, to activateH2B-GFPin the proliferative mural progenitor cell pool and the few white adipocytes predicted to evolve from them during this time frame (Fig. 1a, lower left illustration). Consistent with that notion, in RT-housed mice some perivascular mural cells were GFP labelled and less than 2% of adipocytes were GFP+ (Fig. 1d,e; the black deficit present within inguinal depots is a lymph node). However, when these mice were exposed to the cold we observed that GFP+ nuclei were no longer restricted at the vasculature and now marked a much greater fraction of the adipocyte compartment, as seen in whole depot images (Fig. 1d, GFP is false coloured red in this image, to mirror the RFP colouring inFig. 1b,f,h,j,i). IHC analyses showed that ?30%+/-10 ofUCP1+ beige adipocytes were GFP+, suggesting that some beige adipocytes emanated from thisAdipoTrak GFP+ mural progenitor pool, which is only a subset ofAdipoTrak+ mural cells, those that proliferated in the brief Dox-off window (Fig. 1e). To further explore a possible mural source for beige adipocyte formation, we developed a series of mural cell Cre/inducible Cre;Rosa26RNonemouse marking strains:SM22-Cre,NG2-CreNone,SMA-CreNoneandSMA-rtTA; TRE-Cre212930. We found thatSM22- (transgelin),NG2- (chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan 4) andSMA-driven reporters marked vascular-resident mural cells in many tissues including adipose depots (Fig. 1f-mandSupplementary Fig. 1c-j), consistent with previous reports321313233. For example,SM22-Cre;RFPmarked the adipose tissue (subcutaneous and visceral) vasculature at RT in whole depot and IHC images (Fig. 1f,gandSupplementary Fig. 1c,d). This pattern elaborated on cold exposure with expansion of RFP expression in whole depots and in histology with 69%+/-19 of inguinal and 63%+/-13 of perigonadalUCP1+ beige adipocytes co-expressing RFP (Fig. 1gandSupplementary Fig. 1d). We also observed this pattern with two inducible mural cell Cre (NG2-CreNoneandSMA-CreNone) mice that we randomized to either vehicle or to one dose of TM (250 mg kg-1per day) for 2 consecutive days. Forty-eight hours after the last injection, we housed the mice for 7 days either at RT (23 degrees C) or in the cold (6 degrees C;Fig. 1a). We found thatNG2-CreNone;RFPmarked some mural cells and essentially 100% of adipocytes in subcutaneous adipose depots (inguinal and periscapular;Fig. 1h,i). However, in visceral depots RFP marked only the mural vasculature and not adipocytes, providing a potential tool for the visceral location (Supplementary Fig. 1e,f). In response to the cold we observed that ?51%+/-16 of subcutaneous inguinal and 49%+/-11 of visceral perigonadalUCP1+ beige adipocytes were RFP+ (Fig. 1iandSupplementary Fig. 1f). The fact that ?100% of subcutaneous white adipocytes were labelled at RT and only ?50% ofUCP1+ beige cells were marked after cold exposure indicates that beige sources other than white adipocytes probably exist, the data supported by the results with the visceral beige marking outcomes. We next assessedSMA-CreNone;RFPmice. At RT, RFP+ cells were present in mural vascular positions of all adipose depots but not in adipocytes of any adipose depot (Fig. 1j,kandSupplementary Fig. 1g,h, not shown). On cold stimulation, RFP expression elaborated and we found that 60%+/-18 of subcutaneous inguinal and 65%+/-15 of visceral perigonadalUCP1+ beige adipocytes were RFP+ (Fig. 1kandSupplementary Fig. 1g,h). We observed similar results with aSMA-rtTA; RFPDox-inducible mouse strain (SMA-rtTA; TRE-Cre; Rosa26RNone). Dox was administered 3 days before 7 days of RT or cold exposure (Fig. 1a). At RT, RFP was restricted to the mural vasculature compartment in subcutaneous and visceral depots (Fig. 1l,mandSupplementary Fig. 1i,j). In response to the cold,SMA-rtTA; RFPmarked the adipocyte compartment in whole depots, and in histology the RFP reporter fate mapped into 68%+/-15 and 55%+/-19 ofUCP1+ beige adipocytes in the inguinal and perigonadal adipose depots, respectively (Fig. 1l,mandSupplementary Fig. 1i,j). As the muscle has been proposed as a brown adipocyte source934, we tested two proposed muscle (Myf5-CreandMyogenin-Cre) Cre strains. Myf5-Creis reported to mark the muscle, classical interscapular brown adipose tissue (BAT), a subset of white adipose depots and a range of other tissues91834. Myogenin-Creis reported to mark the skeletal muscle lineage35. We found thatMyf5-Cre; RFPfluorescence was absent in both the subcutaneous inguinal and the visceral perigonadal adipose depots at RT and after cold exposure, consistent with previous reports9(Fig. 2a,bandSupplementary Fig. 2a,b). The tool did mark adipocytes in other depots (please see below). ForMyogenin-Cre;RFPmice, we did not detect RFP fluorescence in any adipose depot at either temperature (Fig. 2c,dandSupplementary Fig. 2c,d). These data are consistent with the notion that lineages marked byMyf5-CreandMyogenin-Creare not sources of beige adipocytes in either inguinal (a major location of beige cells) or perigonadal depots, and in the case of the skeletal muscleMyogenin-Cremarking strain does not appear to be sources in any of the evaluated depots. We also tested two previously reported beige adipocyte marking inducible Cre mice (PDGFRalpha-CreNoneandMyh11-CreNone)1112. BothPDGFRalphaandMyh11are reported to mark the vascular compartment of many tissues323637. In adipose depots,PDGFRalphamarking is reported to be located in non-mural perivascular cells and to mark 45% of beta3-adregeneric-induced perigonadal beige adipocytes12. Myh11is a well-described smooth muscle marker and is reported to mark a subset (15%) of cold-induced beige inguinal adipocytes1132. We first examinedPDGFRalpha-CreNone;RFPmice and found that within adipose depots RFP was principally restricted to non-mural perivasculature positions, as previously reported12, at RT (Fig. 2e,fandSupplementary Fig. 2e,f). After cold exposure, RFP labelled 0-1%+/-1 ofUCP1+ beige adipocytes and the few we could detect were scattered throughout the subcutaneous and visceral adipose depots (Fig. 2fandSupplementary Fig. 2f). Myh11-CreNone;RFPmarked the mural vascular compartment of all adipose depots at either cold temperature or RT (Fig. 2g-jandSupplementary Fig. 2g-j). After 7 days of cold exposure RFP labelled less than 1% ofUCP1+ beige adipocytes but after 14 days of cold conditions ?12%+/-2 and 10%+/-2 of inguinal and perigonadalUCP1+ beige adipocytes were RFP+, respectively, consistent with a previous report11(Fig. 2i,jandSupplementary Fig. 2i,j). Taken together, our data suggest that beige adipocytes are not primarily from an adipocyte, a myogenic or aPDGFRalphasource, but rather from a vascular-residing mural cell source, and that mice harbouring SMA-based genetically engineered tools might be useful strains to mark and track the beige lineage. To begin to probe the adipocyte compartment in a more restricted manner, we turned to two adipocyte-marking strains,adiponectin-CreNoneandaP2-CreNone, and combined them with aRosa26RNonereporter allele. We administered one dose of TM for 2 consecutive days to 2-month-old male mice. Mice were maintained at RT for 1 week and then randomized them to 1 week of either RT or cold temperature. Of note, as RT is lower than thermo-neutrality, it can stimulate beige adipocyte formation3839(Fig. 3a). We found that 2 days after TM administration, 'pulse', both drivers labelled essentially all adipocytes (?99%+/-5;Fig. 3b,candSupplementary Fig. 3a,b). This included labelling of virtually all beige adipocytes that were present at RT (sub-thermo-neutral) conditions and before cold exposure (Fig. 3b,c). After cold stimulation, we found that the percentage of adipocyte driver-marked beige adipocytes dropped significantly to less than 40%. That is, the majority (60-70%+/-15) of cold-inducedUCP1+ beige adipocytes appeared unlabelled (RFP negative) and to derive from a non-adipocyte source (white or existing beige). These percentages correspond quite closely to the percentage of beige cells labelled in theSMA-CreNone; RFPorSMA-rtTA; RFPcold-induced fate-mapping studies (Fig. 1j-m). We also examined areas of the white depots that only contained white adipocytes, areas that lacked beige cells, for the possible presence ofUCP1expression. We found that in bothadiponectin-CreNone;RFPandaP2-CreNone;RFPmouse models, unilocular white adipocytes did not expressUCP1(Supplementary Fig. 3a,b). The various amounts of adipocyte-driver-labelled (30-40%) and -unlabelled (60-70%) beige adipocytes, which do expressadiponectinandaP2(ref. 8), present after cold exposure. This could be reconciled by the existence ofUCP1+ beige cells present at RT, as ambient temperatures are below thermo-neutrality and therefore are a beiging stimulus. To further explore the pre-existing beige adipocytes and the newly formed cold-induced beige cells, we turned to anUCP1-CreNonemouse strain and combined the driver with theRosa26RNonereporter allele. UCP1is expressed in beige adipocytes but not in white adipocytes; thus, the eponymous driver strain can differentiate between beige adipocytes that are pre-existing, and marked by theUCP1-driver, and perdure from white adipocytes, not labelled by theUCP1driver, which could undergo a cold-induced transformation into beige cells. To attempt to discriminate between beige pre-existing and white transformation, we administered one dose of TM for 2 consecutive days toUCP1-CreNone; RFPP60 male mice (Fig. 3d). Mice were maintained at RT and analysed at pulse (2 days post TM induction) to visualize and score existing beige adipocytes, and to determine the recombination efficiency of the reporter compared with endogenousUCP1expression. We found, as reported244041, thatUCP1+ beige adipocytes existed in the P60 RT-housed mice, and that 90% of theseUCP1+ beige adipocytes were RFP+, indicating a high correspondence betweenUCP1-CreNone-driven reporter marking and endogenousUCP1expression/beige adipocytes (Fig. 3d). To attempt to estimate the percentages of beige adipocytes that perdure and those that formde novoafter cold exposure, we TM activated theUCP1-CreNone; RFPreporter to mark pre-existing beige adipocytes, waited a week and then randomized the mice to 7 days of RT or cold temperature (Fig. 3d). At RT, ?90% ofUCP1+ cells co-expressed the RFP reporter, just as at pulse, and cold exposure significantly reduced this to only ?30% co-expression (Fig. 3d). This reduction from 90 to 30% roughly correlates to our fate-mapping results (60-70% marking) in which we studied cold-exposedSMA-CreNone; RFPandSMA-rtTA; RFPmice. AdipoTrakandMfy5-Crehave been exploited to examine white and brown cell biology, and here we further examined the marking potential of these mouse strains in various adipose depots and organs913272834. To further examineAdipoTrak, we incorporated both aTRE-H2B-GFPreporter and aRosa26RNonereporter to generate a double reporter strain (PPARgammaNone; TRE-Cre; TRE-H2B-GFP; Rosa26RNone). We combined the two marking alleles, as they provide different information:TRE-H2B-GFPwill report activeAdipoTrakexpression andRosa26RNonewill report both active and historicAdipoTrakexpression13. In this combined setting, yellow indicates both active and historic expression, whereas red indicates only historicAdipoTrak(PPARgamma) expression in the absence of active expression (Supplementary Fig. 4a). We examined 2-month-oldAdipoTrak; RFP; GFPmice and found that yellow (overlap between RFP and GFP) was only apparent in the adipose tissues (Fig. 4a). The brain, muscle and pancreas were RFP+ and lacked GFP expression, indicating that these tissues hadAdipoTrakhistories, consistent with our reports of embryonicAdipoTrakexpression patterns14(Fig. 4a). These data, along with those inFig. 1, indicate that in adultsAdipoTrakis principally restricted to adipose depots and may provide a tool to mark the beige progenitors and to fate map cold-induced beiging. We next examinedMyf5-Cremice42for RFP expression in day 17.5 embryos (E17.5) and in 2-month-old adult mice (Supplementary Fig. 4b). We found thatMyf5-CreE17.5 embryos and 2-month-old mice were visibly red, that is, even in the absence of fluorescent microscopy, indicative of robust fluorescence (Fig. 4bandSupplementary Fig. 4c, left panel). Fluorescence imaging of embryos showed that the dorsal region, craniofacial region, front and hind limbs, and the tail were RFP+, and the liver and the eyes were the only tissues in which we did not detect RFP (Supplementary Fig. 4c, right panel). This broad RFP expression was also observed in 2-month-oldMyf5-Cremice. RFP was detected in the brain, classical BAT, kidney, liver, lymph nodes, skeletal muscle, pancreas and skin (Supplementary Fig. 4d). Consistent with reports93443,Myf5-Cre; RFPdid not mark inguinal, perigonadal or mesenteric white adipose depots but did mark periscapular and retroperitoneal white adipose tissue and essentially all unilocular white adipocytes in these two depots appeared RFP+ (Fig. 4c,d). In the periscapular and retroperitoneal adipose depots,Myf5-Cre; RFPmarking seemed quite indiscriminate, labelling what appeared to be essentially every cell type. For example, in adipose vessels,Myf5-Cre; RFPmarked the endothelial cells, mural cells and other perivascular cells (Supplementary Fig. 4e, not shown). The widespread expression observed in histology was supported by flow cytometric analyses. For example, ?55% of all stromal vascular fraction (SVF) cells were RFP+ (Supplementary Fig. 4f) and these cells encompassed mural lineages, endothelial lineages, immune cells,PDGFRalphacells and so on. Quantitative PCR (qPCR) studies examining fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS)-isolated RFP- and RFP+ cells indicated thatMyf5/RFP+ cells were not enriched in adipocyte progenitor, mural and endothelial cell markers, and in large part the RFP- and RFP+ cells had similar expression patterns (Fig. 4f). We also attempted to test whether the RFP expression in the adipose depots reflected active or historicMyf5expression by using both flow cytometric analyses of RFP+ cells and qPCR analyses of FACS-isolated RFP+ cells. Based on these studies the RFP+ cells did not appear to expressMyf5protein or messenger RNA (Fig. 4e,f); that is, the RFP expression was based on historic Cre activity. We next examined whether the historicMyf5-Cre-driven RFP expression would mark cold-induced beige cells. Histological studies fromMyf5-Cre; RFPmice housed in the cold showed that 95% of periscapular and 45% of retroperitonealUCP1+ beige adipocytes were RFP+ (Fig. 4d). Taken together, the remarkably general marking, lack of inducibility and non-correspondence of endogenous expression to Cre-driven marking appear to be significant issues for the Myf5 stain in adipose biology and probably confound interpretation and utility. Transdifferentiation of mature unilocular white adipocytes has been proposed as a source of beige adipocytes56. However, our data suggest that cells expressing a mural cell genetic signature (SM22+,Myh11+,NG2+ andSMA+) are a key source of cold-induced beige adipocytes. A possible reconciliation of the observations that the smooth muscle/mural drivers fate map into beige cells with the theorized white adipocyte transdifferentiation is that mature white adipocytes could express mural markers or marking strain-driven RFP, similar to what we observed withNG2-CreNoneand a subset of subcutaneous white adipocytes (Fig. 1i). To explore this possibility, we further characterized endogenousSMAexpression andSMA-CreNone; RFPexpression (Supplementary Fig. 5a) in white adipose depots with a focus on potential expression in adipocytes. We evaluated endogenousSMAexpression in depots of wild-type mice using IHC. In these studies, endogenousSMAappeared restricted to the adipose tissue vasculature in all depots (subcutaneous and visceral) and it did not appear to be expressed in any examined mature white adipocytes (Fig. 5a,b). We also assessed endogenousSMAexpression andSMA-CreNone-driven RFP expression inSMA-CreNone; RFPmice. In the uninduced (no TM) state, we again observed, by IHC, that endogenousSMAwas restricted to the vasculature of all adipose depots (subcutaneous and visceral), and that endogenousSMAwas not expressed in adipocytes (Fig. 5c). We also found that RFP fluorescence was not induced in the absence of TM (Fig. 5c). We then examinedSMAand RFP expression in theSMA-CreNone; RFPsetting 2 days after administering TM. We found that endogenousSMAandSMA-CreNone-driven RFP were restricted to the adipose tissue vasculature and were not expressed in adipocytes (Fig. 5d). To further examine the possibility thatSMAis expressed in adipocytes, we isolated both stromal vascular (SV) cells and floated adipocytes from RT-housedSMA-CreNone; RFPmice 2 days after administering TM. We then quantified endogenousSMAandSMA-CreNone-driven RFP mRNA expression with qPCR. We found thatSMAand RFP mRNA appeared to be expressed only in the SV compartment and we did not detect appreciable signal in the adipocyte fraction (Fig. 5e). We next examined individual SV cells and individual adipocytes, scoring over 5,000, for RFP expression. For this, we also stained the SV cells and the floated adipocytes, and with LipidTox Green, to highlight lipids. In the fluorescent microscopic examinations, we did not detect any adipocytes that expressed RFP, unlike the positive control SV compartment (Fig. 5f,g). We performed an analogous series of studies, first isolating adipocytes and then administered TM to induce reporter expressionex vivo(Fig. 5h). Again, we obtained similar results: no RFP expression in adipocytes. We next turned to cell culture studies, to examine the dynamics ofSMAexpression during white and beige adipogenesis, and to further test whetherSMAmight be expressed in cell culture-induced mature white or beige adipocytes. For this, we isolated SV cells, which contained theSMA-positive mural compartment (Fig. 5e), and cultured them for 7 days in white or beige adipogenic conditions and quantified endogenousSMAexpression. We found that on either adipogenic inductionSMAexpression was rapidly and sustainably reduced (Supplementary Fig. 5c). We also examined the possibility that TM may perdure beyond the 2-day interval after administration and activateSMA-CreNonein mature beige or white adipocytes during the cold exposure period. For this, we extended the washout period to 14 days, administering TM toSMA-CreNone; RFPP60 mice, waiting 2 weeks before cold exposure and then examining P81 mice. We found thatSMA-marked cells, after a longer TM washout period, still fate mapped into cold-induced beige adipocytes at roughly the same percentage as we previously observed with the 2-day interval (64%+/-17;Fig. 5i). EndogenousSMAandSMA-CreNone-driven RFP, before cold exposure, appeared to be restricted to the mural vascular compartment in several studies including IHC. The IHC studies also indicated that RFP and endogenousSMAexpression had high concordance (Fig. 5d). We further examined potential concordance of endogenousSMAand the RFP signal using flow cytometry, to determine whether RFP-positive cells faithfully co-expressedSMAusing cells isolated fromSMA-CreNone; RFPmice 2 days after TM administration (pulse). We found that virtually all RFP+ cells wereSMA+, based on antibody staining forSMA(Supplementary Fig. 5d). The RFP-positive cells constituted about 50% of the totalSMApopulation (Supplementary Fig. 5e). We also characterized the RFP-positive cells in flow cytometry and qPCR studies, finding that the RFP+ cells were enriched in adipocyte progenitor and mural cell markers but not in endothelial cell markers (Supplementary Fig. 5f,g). We also examined classical BAT for endogenousSMAexpression and forSMA-CreNone-driven RFP reporter expression. At RT or after cold exposure, both endogenousSMAand RFP were restricted to the vasculature and were not expressed in mature brown adipocytes (Supplementary Fig. 5h,i). We next examinedSMA-rtTA; RFP(SMA-rtTA; TRE-Cre; Rosa26RRFP) mice (Supplementary Fig. 6a) using similar tests to those performed on theSMA-CreNone; RFPmice. We first inspectedSMA-rtTA; RFPmice in the uninduced (no Dox) state. We observed, by IHC, that endogenousSMAwas restricted to the adipose tissue vasculature, that endogenousSMAwas not present in adipocytes, and that RFP fluorescence was not expressed in the absence of Dox (Fig. 6a). We then examined the RFP expression pattern in adipose depots ofSMA-rtTA; RFPmice 2 days after Dox administration (pulse). RFP was restricted to the adipose tissue vasculature and aligned with endogenous perivascularSMA, adjacent toPECAM, in all adipose depots. RFP was not visible in adipocytes (Fig. 5b,d). We also generated SV and floated adipocyte fractions from RT Dox-pulsedSMA-rtTA; RFPmice and quantified RFP expression with qPCR. RFP was abundantly expressed in SV cells but not in adipocytes (Fig. 6c). We also floated adipocytes after a Dox pulse and examined them for RFP expression and for lipid staining. We did not detect RFP fluorescence in any adipocytes (Fig. 6e); over 5,000 adipocytes were examined in each analysis. We next analysed RFP+ and RFP- cells with flow cytometry and found that ?97% of RFP+ cells co-expressedSMA(Fig. 6f). qPCR evaluation of flow cytometry-sorted RFP+ and RFP- cells showed that endogenousSMAwas enriched in the RFP+ cell fraction (Fig. 6g). We further examined RFP+ cells by flow cytometry and qPCR, and found that RFP+ cells were enriched in mural and adipose progenitor markers, while lacking expression of endothelial or adipocyte markers (Fig. 6h,i, not shown). We then examined other tissues forSMA-CreNone- andSMA-rtTA-driven RFP expression. We found that both models had similar tissue expression patterns (Supplementary Fig. 6b,c). In both models, RFP labelled the vasculature and smooth muscle of the brain, cardiac and skeletal muscle (although to different levels), intestine, kidney, lung, the testes and the uterus (Supplementary Fig. 6b,c, not shown). We also probed theSMA-rtTA-driven RFP reporter for expression in classical interscapular BAT. We found that the reporter was not expressed in mature brown adipocytes and remained at the vascular under both RT and cold conditions (Supplementary Fig. 6d). Together, theSMA-CreNoneandSMA-rtTAexperiments support the concordance of endogenousSMA, andSMA-CreNone- andSMA-rtTA-driven RFP expression. In the detailed characterizations described inFigs 5and6and inSupplementary Figs 5 and 6, endogenousSMAexpression andSMA-driven reporter expression appeared restricted to the mural compartment, and expression was not observed in mature white adipocytes under RT conditions. Duringin vitrobeige adipogenic induction of inguinal SV cells,SMAmRNA expression was rapidly reduced (within 24 h) and this suppressed expression was sustained throughout the remainder of beige adipocyte differentiation (Supplementary Fig. 5c). However, it could be possible that endogenousSMAis expressed in white and beige adipocytes onin vivocold exposure. To assess this, we housed wild-type mice in the cold for 7 days. We then examined expression of endogenousSMAusing immunofluorescence staining and found that after cold exposure endogenousSMAexpression remained restricted to the vasculature and was not expressed inUCP1+ beige adipocytes or inUCP1- white adipocytes (Fig. 7a,b). We continued to pursue the possibility that endogenous SMA might be expressed in white and/or beige adipocytes, by using two genetic strains to fluorescently highlight these two adipocyte cell types:Adiponectin-CreNone;RFP(white and beige) andUCP1- CreNone;RFP(beige). We housed uninduced (no TM) 2-month-oldUCP1-CreNone; RFPandAdiponectin-CreNone; RFPmale mice in the cold for 7 days, to stimulatede novobeige adipocyte formation. After cold exposure, we administered one dose of TM and maintained the mice at RT for 24 h (Fig. 7c,d). We found thatUCP1-CreNone; RFPmarked ?90%+/-7 of allUCP1+ immunostained beige adipocytes, indicating high correspondence between reporter and endogenousUCP1expression. We did not detect, by immunostaining, endogenousSMAexpression in anyUCP1-driven RFP-marked mature beige adipocytes. Rather, endogenousSMAremained restricted to the vascular compartment (Fig. 7c). We observed similar results with theAdiponectin-CreNone; RFPstrain. RFP labelled all (100%+/-6) white and beige adipocytes; however, endogenous SMA expression was restricted to the vessel and did not overlap withAdiponectin-CreNone; RFPlabelling (Fig. 7d). We next used a similar series of tests to determine whetherSMA-driven RFP expression might be induced in response to cold temperatures. For this, we examined RFP expression in cold-exposedSMA-CreNone; RFPmice that had never been administered TM (Fig. 7e,f). In these uninduced cold-exposed specimens, we did not detect RFP fluorescence (Fig. 7e). We next housed 2-month old uninducedSMA-CreNone; RFPmale mice in the cold and after a week we induced reporter expression with a dose of TM. When induced after the cold, RFP expression appeared restricted to the blood vessels and we did not detect RFP expression inUCP1+ beige adipocytes (Fig. 7f). We next repeated these studies using cold-exposedSMA-rtTA; RFPmice that were never administered Dox or were administered Dox after a week of cold (Fig. 7g,h). In the uninduced (no Dox) specimens, we did not detect RFP fluorescence (Fig. 7g). When the mice received Dox induction after cold exposure, RFP fluorescence appeared restricted to the vasculature and was not detected inUCP1+ beige adipocytes (Fig. 7h). The various approaches and methods indicate that endogenousSMA,SMA-CreNone-driven RFP andSMA-rtTA-driven RFP are not expressed in white or beige adipocytes. Rather, they appear to be present in the vascular compartment, although RFP does fate map intode novobeige adipocytes on cold exposure. TheSM22-Credriver, bothSMAdrivers and theMyh11-CreNonedriver marked the perivascular compartment and, in a restricted manner, with no apparent marking of adipocytes (Figs 1and2andSupplementary Figs 1 and 2). All four of these marking strains marked cold-induced beige cells, albeit with different frequencies:SM22and the two inducibleSMAdrivers did so at a similarly high percentage (60-70%), whereas the inducibleMyh11driver did so at a low percentage (Figs 1and2andSupplementary Figs 1 and 2). This discrepancy could be accounted for if the various marking strains drive RFP expression in different cell types. To assess this notion, we immunostained histological samples derived from P60SM22-Cre; RFPadipose depots with antibodies directed againstSMAandMyh11. We found a fairly high concordance of expression of endogenousSMAwithSM22-RFP. However, endogenousMyh11staining overlapped withSM22-RFP less frequently (Supplementary Fig. 7a,b). Flow cytometric studies, using antibodies directed againstSMA,NG2,Myh11andPECAMendothelial marker, also indicated a diversity of marking: ?55% ofSM22-RFPcells co-expressedSMA, ?40% ofSM22-RFPcells co-expressedMyh11and ?15% ofSM22-RFPcells co-expressedNG2; co-expression withPECAMwas minimal (Supplementary Fig. 7c). We also FACS-isolatedSM22-RFP+andSM22-RFP- cells and quantified the levels of expression in the isolated cells for expression ofSMAandMyh11, of other mural cell markers and of endothelial markers. We found thatSM22andSMAwere quite enriched in theSM22-RFP+ cells, and that althoughMyh11levels were higher in theSM22-RFP+ compared withSM22-RFP- cells, the enrichment was to a lesser extent (Supplementary Fig. 7d). NG2had roughly equal expression inSM22-RFP+ andSM22-RFP- cells,PDGFRbetaenrichment was closer to theSMApatterns andPECAMexpression was higher in theSM22-RFP- cells. We next examined and compared inguinal adipose depots for endogenous expression ofMyh11andSMA. We found thatMyh11andSMAexpression overlapped on some vessels, whereas in other vessels there was no co-expression (Supplementary Fig. 7e). This heterogeneous pattern was recapitulated in TM-pulsedMyh11-CreNone; RFPmice, in comparisons of RFP and endogenousSMAexpression. We found thatMyh11-RFP+ cells marked the vasculature of the inguinal adipose depots, and that only some vessels showed co-localization ofMyh11-RFPandSMA(Supplementary Fig. 7f). We also flow cytometrically profiled theMyh11-CreNone; RFPcells. We found that ?98% ofMyh11-RFP+ cells co-expressed endogenousMyh11, and that about ?60% of the total number of immunostainedMyh11cells expressedMyh11-CreNone-driven RFP (Supplementary Fig. 7g,h). The flow cytometry studies also supported the diversity ofMyh11,SMAexpression: ?35% of theMyh11-RFPcells co-expressedMyh11and ?60% ofMyh11-RFPcells immunostained withSMA, whereas only ?25% of the antibody-positiveSMAcells co-expressed RFP (Supplementary Fig. 7i,j). We also examined the expression levels of the various mural markers in FACS-isolatedMyh11-CreNone; RFP+ and RFP- cells. We found thatMyh11was highly enriched in theMyh11-RFP+ cells; bothSMAandNG2were enriched, but to a lesser extent (Supplementary Fig. 7i,k). Together, the IHC, flow cytometry and qPCR studies indicate that there is only partial overlap between several mural cell markers, and that, similar to what is observed in other tissues and organs2129303142, there is a significant mural cell and vascular cell heterogeneity within adipose depots, potentially accounting for the different percentage of fate-mapping results we observed with the different mural cell-driver mouse strains. Elucidation of the biological basis of this heterogeneity may help clarify why the inducibleSMA-driven tools appear to have the best characteristics for analysing beige biology. To test potential necessity ofSMA-CreNone-expressing cells for cold-induced beiging, we attempted two strategies as follows: (1) a cell-killing strategy (diphtheria toxin fragment A (DTA))44and (2) a blockade of adipocyte differentiation (PPARgammadeletion)4546. ThePPARgammaconditional deletion experiments were designed to test the requirement ofSMAmural cells to generate beige adipocytes, by blocking their ability to differentiate, not the essential role ofPPARgammain adipogenesis47. A concern of these approaches is that theSMAtools are expressed in mural compartments of many tissues and organs, and also mark other muscle types (Supplementary Fig. 6c,d)21. In addition, it also seems likely to be that even in adipose depots SMA is expressed in many mural cells that do not possess progenitor potential. Thus, non-autonomous issues may cloud the data, as many cellular debris created by the DTA cell-killing strategy. To attempt to minimize some of these concerns, the studies were conducted in a temporally regulated manner and proximate to cold exposure (Supplementary Fig. 8a). For these studies, we integrated conditionalRosa26R-DTAor conditionalPPARgammaNonealleles with the inducibleSMA-CreNonedriver strain. We then randomizedSMA-DTAandSMA-PPARgammaNonemice to vehicle or TM and to RT or cold temperature (Supplementary Fig. 8a). Vehicle-treated mice and mice lacking a salient allele (for example, noDTA) served as negative controls. Both strategies (DTAandPPARgammaNone) appeared to inhibit cold-induced beige adipocyte formation and appeared to alter the physiological responses to cold exposure (Fig. 8a-e). For example, the inducedSMA-DTAandSMA-PPARgammaNonemice had reduced body temperatures, elevated blood glucose levels, significant reductions in the quantities of multilocular orUCP1+ cells in haematoxylin and eosin and IHC, and disrupted induction of beige adipocyte/thermogenic genes; the levels approximated those of RT controls (Fig. 8a-e). The inducedSMA-DTAandSMA-PPARgammaNonemice had normal activity, body weight and food intake, and appeared phenotypically normal (Supplementary Fig. 8b,c, not shown)14. At RT, white and classical brown adipose depots and non-adipose tissues had normal weight and histological appearance, had normal vessels and did not display vascular leakage or haemorrhage, consistent with previous reports14(Supplementary Fig. 8d-g). We also repeated theRosa26R-DTAnecessity studies using theSMA-rtTAdriver strain and found similar results: lower temperature, elevated sera glucose and blunted beiging as assessed by histology and beige gene expression (Supplementary Fig. 9a-d). We also found thatSMA-rtTA-DTAmutant mice housed at RT appeared normal and had preserved body weight and food intake (Supplementary Fig. 9e,f). To attempt to assess whether the blunted beiging observedin vivomight be due to cell autonomous actions, we turned toex vivoanalyses. For this, we TM inducedSMA-PPARgammaNonemice and then isolated and cultured SV cells in beige adipogenic conditions. Similar to thein vivosetting, beige adipocyte formation was disrupted with blunted expression of beige markers, indicating a potential cell autonomous effect (Fig. 8f). A potential issue of deletingPPARgammainSMA+ mural cells could be changes in vascular function or integrity, which could alter cold responses and beiging. To pursue this notion we turned to theMyh11-CreNonemice, because in flow cytometry studies theMyh11-CreNone; RFPmarked roughly the same percentage (8-13%) of white adipose tissue vascular-residing mural cells as did theSMAdrivers, and becauseMyh11is also expressed in many other mural compartments and muscle cells throughout the body (Supplementary Fig. 6). Nevertheless, theMyh11-CreNone; RFPhad a much lower beige adipocyte fate-mapping potential thanSMAdriver mice (Figs 1and2, andSupplementary Figs 1 and 2). Therefore, using theMyh11-CreNonedriver to alterPPARgammafunction might allow discrimination between possible changes in vascular function, presumably present in roughly equal amounts in theMyh11andSMAdriver settings. We incorporated thePPARgammaNoneallele withMyh11-CreNone, to generateMyh11-CreNone; PPARgammamice and inducedPPARgammadeletion by administering one dose of TM for 2 consecutive days. After washout, we housed these mice in the cold for 7 and 14 days, and our analyses indicated that cold-induced beiging and cold-induced physiological responses were unchanged. For example, body temperatures and sera glucose levels were similar between controls and mutants (Fig. 8g,h). Histological, IHC and molecular analyses indicated that beige adipocyte formation was unchanged between controls and mutants (Fig. 8i-k). Myh11-CreNone; PPARgamma-deleted mice appeared phenotypically normal and had similar body weight and adipose tissue weight at RT. We also did not observe any vasculature abnormalities or leak within the white adipose depots (not shown). We also analysedex vivobeige adipogenic potential and isolated SV cells from TM-induced control andMyh11-CreNone; PPARgammamice. We cultured the cells to confluence, incubated them in beige adipogenic conditions and quantified triglyceride accumulation and beige marker expression. These studies indicated that beige adipogenesis was relatively normal; both triglyceride content and mRNA levels of beige adipocyte markers were similar in control and mutant cells (Fig. 8l). Cold-induced beige adipocytes convert glucose and fatty acids to heat, thereby potentially increasing energy expenditure264849505152. These beige cellular furnaces could help address the widespread and conjoined obesity and diabetes epidemics535455. Stimulating beige adipocyte formation and function may therefore lead to improved glucose homeostasis, increased metabolic rate and lower adiposity, and some clinical studies support this notion56575859. This therapeutic potential has been limited, because the origins of beige adipocytes are not well understood, because the precise cellular source of the beige phenomenon is controversial and because additional tools to mark and manipulate beige progenitors are needed. Our data, based on a series of adipocyte, muscle and mural cell Cre and inducible Cre genetically modified mouse strains suggest that white adipose tissue-resident mural cells are an important cellular source of cold-induced beige adipocytes. Several mural-marking mice displayed fate mapping into beige adipocytes and two independent inducibleSMA-based strains,SMA-CreNoneandSMA-rtTA, appeared suited to explore and delineate cold-induced beige biology. For example, the majority of cold-induced beige adipocytes seemed to derive from theSMA-marked sources. Although neither white nor beige adipocytes appeared to express endogenousSMA, orSMA-CreNone-orSMA-rtTA-driven RFP (on activation of the reporter), mural cells did and in a restricted manner. When we disruptedSMA-expressing cell function, by inhibiting adipocyte differentiation (deletingPPARgamma) or with a cell-killing strategy (activatingDTA) inSMA-CreNonecells and usingSMA-rtTAto activateDTA, beiging was impairedin vivoandex vivo. In these three mutant mouse strains, not only was beige adipocyte formation diminished but also the mutant mice were unable to appropriately defend body temperature and had elevated glucose levels. However, it is plausible that some of these effects on blood glucose and temperature could stem from roles ofSMA-CreNone- and SMA-rtTA-expressing cells in adipose mural cells that did not have progenitor potential and in non-adipose tissues such as cardiac and skeletal muscles, as both these drivers mark these tissues (Fig. 1andSupplementary Figs 5 and 6)21. For example, theSMA-DTAmodels could have increased skeletal muscle cell death, which could lower body temperature due to impaired or lack of shivering (muscle contraction). Further, glucose uptake could also be diminished due to muscle atrophy. Nevertheless, histologically, these tissues appeared normal, the mice appeared healthy and had normal food intake and activity, and at RT the strains did not appear to have an altered phenotype. To attempt to control for some of these non-autonomous concerns, we also alteredPPARgammafunction using theMyh11-CreNonedriver; these mice had normal beiging, normal blood glucose levels and were able to defend their body temperature. Nonetheless, further characterization is needed to further delineate potential 'side effects' of ablatingSMA+ cells in allSMAdriver-expressing tissues. The data in this study in concert with other reports indicate that white and beige adipocyte progenitors may have common features such as lineage origin, cell compartment locality and others. For example, theSMAdrivers' fate map into white adipocytes under the influence of some stimuli such as RT and into beige adipocytes under other conditions such as cold exposure. This raises an interesting scenario in which cold exposure first triggers theSMA-marked mural cells to undergo formation of white adipocytes that then convert to a beige adipocyte phenotype. This possibility is in line with the conventional hypothesis of a white to beige transdifferentiation. However, this is not yet clear whether the sameSMA-marked cell can give rise to both white and beige adipocytes or to only one cell type. Further studies and genetic tools are needed to tease apart the functions and relationships of white and beige progenitors. In addition toSMAwe found that other mural cell Cre/inducible Cre drivers marked cold-induced beige adipocytes. In agreement with Spiegelman and colleagues11, we observed thatMyh11+ cells fate mapped into 12% of beige adipocytes after 2 weeks of cold exposure. AdipoTrakalso marked the cold-induced beiging process as didNG2andSM22; however, these tools have caveats. AdipoTrakin the unsuppressed state marks the mural progenitors, but also the forming adipose lineage and mature adipocytes. These issues can be overcome when combining Dox suppression/release andH2B-GFPmarking, the labeling of actively proliferating cells in the mural compartment. With this method, we found that mural progenitor marking is relatively restricted but this restriction evolves under the influence of cold temperatures to include fate mapping into beige adipocytes. This supports the mural progenitor hypothesis and the notion that during lineage specification amplification of the compartment is present. NG2-CreNonehas issues in subcutaneous depots, as it marked both the progenitor and adipocyte compartment, potentially masking the source of cold-induced beige adipocytes. Of note, in subcutaneous depots 100% of white adipocytes were marked, but only about 50% of beige adipocytes were marked after cold exposure, consistent with the possibility that non-adipocytes are key sources of cold-induced beiging. Similar outcomes (100% white adipocyte marking to 45% beige adipocyte marking post cold) in retroperitoneal depots ofMyf5-Cre; RFPmice amplify this notion. In visceral depots,NG2-CreNonemarking appeared to have relative restriction to the mural progenitor compartment, not marking white mature adipocytes, and did fate map into cold-induced beige adipocyte formation. TheSM22-Crestrain labelled a majority of beige adipocytes and the mural perivascular compartment; however, this tool suffers from the lack of inducibility of straight Cre tool/systems; active and historicallySM22-Cre-expressing cells will be labelled. This cell marking system is likely to be inappropriate for fate mapping because of the inability to determine when and whereSM22is expressed (stem, progenitor, mature adipocyte and embryonic timing and so on). The fact that a wide range of independently derived mural marking strains (for example,AdipoTrak,SM22-Cre,NG2-CreNone,Myh11-CreNone,SMA-CreNoneandSMA-rtTA) fate map into cold-induced beiging indicates that mural cells are a beige progenitor source. However, the strains were expressed in common and independent sets of adipose depot mural cells and the endogenous proteins also appeared to label distinct populations of mural cells. This heterogeneity may in part account for why the drivers had different fate-mapping efficiencies. Potential insight into the relationship of the different murals may be gleaned from the increase in beige adipocyte marking percentage of theMyh11strain when comparing 1 week with 2 weeks of cold exposure. This may potentially identify an evolution of the marked cells during this time frame. More extensive lineage studies are needed to tease apart the relationship between the various mural markers and the beige progenitor mural marker signature. The development of new genetic tools may foster the ability to dissect the relevant cell types and specification steps that underlie formation of beige adipocytes. Taken together, studies support the notion that mural cells are an important source of cold-induced beiging, and that inducibleSMA-based engineered mice,SMA-CreNoneorSMA-rtTA, are appropriate strains to study cold-induced beige adipocyte formation and function8115152. These mouse strains and derivatives thereof may enable identification and isolation of the beige progenitors and their descendants, as well as delineation of signals and mechanisms that control cold-inducible beige behaviour-essential steps on the road to therapeutic manipulation. All animals were maintained under the ethical guidelines of the UT Southwestern Medical Center Animal Care and Use Committee according to NIH guidelines. Mice were housed in a 12:12 light:dark cycle at 23 degrees C, and chow and water were providedad libitum. Adiponectin-CreNone(Stock 024671),Myf5-Cre(Stock 007893),SM22-Cre(Stock 017491),Myh11-CreNone(Stock 019079),NG2-CreNone(Stock 008538),PPARgammaNone(Stock 004584),Rosa26RNone(Stock 006331) andRosa26RNone(Stock 007914) mice were obtained from the Jackson Laboratory. AdipoTrak and aP2-CreERT2were previously described11. Dr Eric Olson generously providedMyogenin-CreandUCP1-CreNonemice. Dr Pierre Chambon generously providedSMA-CreNonemice. Dr Beverly Rothermel generously providedSMA-rtTA mice. Drs Sean Morrison and Bill Richardson generously provided thePDGFRalpha-CreNonemice. We performed experiments on 2-month-old males, unless specific ages were specified. All Cre mouse strains were maintained on a C57BL/6J and 129SV mixed background. Pure C57BL/6J 2-month-old male mice were purchased from Jackson Laboratories. Cre recombination was induced by administering TM dissolved in sunflower oil (Sigma, 100 mg kg-1interperitoneal injection) on 2 consecutive days. Twenty-four hours post TM injection is considered a pulse. rtTA activation was induced by Dox (0.5 mg ml-1in 1% sucrose) provided in the drinking water and protected from light, and it was changed every 2-3 days. For cold studies, mice were placed in a 6 degrees C cold metabolic chamber for 7-14 days. After recombination was induced, mice were randomized to RT or cold exposed for 7-14 days. We performed experiments on mice after a 48-h TM washout period, a week TM washout period and a 2-week TM washout period. No animals were excluded from any experiments unless mice displayed wounds from fighting. Haematoxylin and eosin staining was carried out on paraffin sections using standard methods. Adipose tissues were fixed in formalin overnight, dehydrated, embedded in paraffin and sectioned with a microtome at 5-8 mum thicknesses. Immunostaining was performed in either paraffin sections or cryostat sections (5-8 mum) of tissues freshly embedded in optical coherence tomography13. Briefly, samples were pre-incubated with permeabilization buffer (0.3% Triton X-100 in PBS) for 30 min at RT and then incubated sequentially with primary antibody (4 degrees C, overnight) and secondary antibody (2 h at RT), all in blocking buffer (5% normal donkey serum in 1 * PBS). Antibodies used for immunostaining are as follows: rabbit-anti-UCP1 (1:200, Abcam), mouse-anti-RFP (1:100, Clontech), rat-anti-PECAM (1:200, BD Biosciences), rabbit-anti-alpha-SMA (1:200, Sigma) and goat-anti-Perilipin (1:200, BD Biosciences). For negative control subjects, primary antibody was replaced with 5% normal donkey serum. Secondary antibodies including cy3 donkey anti-mouse, cy2 donkey anti-rabbit and cy2 donkey anti-rat were from Jackson ImmunoResearch. All secondary antibodies were used at a 1:500 dilution. Lipid was stained with LipidTOX Green (1:100, Life Technologies). Immunostaining images were collected on a Zeiss LSM500 confocal microscope, an Olympus IX70 inverted microscope or an Olympus upright BX40 microscope. All experimental and control images of the immunofluorescence data were collected using identical imaging settings. Paraffin-embedded tissues were sectioned with a Microm HM 325 microtome. Cryostat sectioning was performed with a Microm HM505 E cryostat. For quantification of images, two independent observers assessed three random fields in ten random sections from at least three mice per cohort. NIH Image J software using the JACoP60(Just Another Colocalization Plugin) extension was used to quantify co-localization. First, the total area of UCP1 immunostaining was calculated. Next, the area of co-localized UCP1 immunostaining and RFP (for all drivers) was calculated. To derive the total percentage of co-localization, the per cent co-localization between UCP1 immunostaining and RFP was divided by the total area of UCP1 immunostaining. To identify SMA-CreERT2; RFP expression in mature adipocytes, mice were administered one dose of TM for 2 consecutive days. Subcutaneous and visceral adipose depots were isolated and adipocytes were fractioned by floatation. Adipocytes were stained with LipidTOX (Life Technologies) and DAPI (4,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole) to visualize intact adipocytes. For quantification of images, two independent observers assessed three random fields in ten random sections from at least three mice per cohort. Positivity was assessed by LipidTox+, DAPI+ and RFP+. The SV cells were isolated13. Briefly, we pooled subcutaneous (inguinal and periscapular) white adipose tissues for fractionation, unless indicated otherwise. After 2 h of slow shaking in isolation buffer (100 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 120 mM NaCl, 50 mM KCl, 5 mM glucose, 1 mM CaCl2, 1.5% BSA) containing 1 mg ml-1collagenase at 37 degrees C, the digest was pipetted up and down a few times for better dissociation. The suspension was then spun at 800gfor 10 min; the resultant floating layer was the adipocyte layer and the pellet was a crude SV fraction. The floating adipocyte layer was washed in 1 * PBS, spun at 800gfor 5 min and the solution was removed from below. The pellet was then resuspended in erythrocyte lysis buffer (0.83% NH4Cl in H2O) for 8 min and spun at 800gfor 5 min. The pellet was washed once in 1 * PBS, resuspended and passed through 30 mum mesh. Isolated SV cells were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS). White adipogenesis was induced by treating confluent cells with DMEM containing 10% FBS, insulin (0.5 mug ml-1), dexamethasone (5 muM) and isobutylmethylxanthine (0.5 mM)11. Beige adipogenesis was induced by treating confluent cells with DMEM containing 10% FBS, insulin (0.5 mug ml-1), dexamethasone (5 muM), isobutylmethylxanthine (0.5 mM), troglitazone (1 muM), 5 nM indomethacin and T3 (2 nM)44. To induce thermogenic genes, cells were treated with 10 muM forskolin for 4 h and harvested to collect mRNA55. Triglyceride accumulation assay was performed using a kit from ZenBio61following the manufacturer's protocol. To induceSMA-CreNone; RFPrecombinationex vivo, adipocytes were isolated from 2-month-old uninducedSMA-CreNone; RFPmale mice. TM (1 muM) was then administeredex vivofor 24 h and the floated adipocytes were fluorescence microscopically assessed for RFP and lipid (LipidTox, Life Technologies). SV cells were isolated11and washed, centrifuged at 800gfor 5 min and analysed with a FACScans analyser or sorted with a BD FACS Aria operated by the UT Southwestern Flow Cytometry Core. Data analysis was performed using BD FACS Diva software. For RFP+ sorting, live SV cells from young 2-month-oldR26RNonemice were stained with propidium iodide (1 mg ml-1) to exclude dead cells and sorted based on native fluorescence (RFP). The SV cells from control mice were used to determine background fluorescence levels. The dissociated SV cells were also analysed for mural and perivascular markers by flow cytometry. Briefly, SV cells were incubated with primary antibodies on ice for 30 min and then washed twice with the staining buffer and incubated with secondary antibody for another 30 min on ice before flow cytometric analysis. Total RNA was extracted using TRIzol (Invitrogen) from either mouse tissues or cells. Complementary DNA synthesis was performed using Superscript III reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen) using 1 mug of RNA13. Gene expression was analysed using Power SYBR Green PCR Master Mix with ABI 7500 Real-Time PCR System. qPCR values were normalized by 18s rRNA expression. Primer sequences are available on request. Temperature was monitored daily using a rectal probe (Physitemp)62. Briefly, the probe was lubricated with glycerol and was inserted 1.27 cm (1/2 inch) and temperature was measured when stabilized. Glucose monitoring, that is, blood glucose levels were measured with a Contour glucometer (Bayer). Statistical significance assessed by two-tailed Student'st-test. Data are shown as means and error bars indicate s.e.m. Studies were performed on two or three independent cohorts and were performed on three to four mice per group unless specified. Sample size was determined using previous experimental studies for fate mapping and metabolic assessment. Mice were randomized to the cold temperature or RT in a blinded manner. How to cite this article:Berry, D. C.et al. Mouse strains to study cold-inducible beige progenitors and beige adipocyte formation and function. Nat. Commun. 7:10184 doi: 10.1038/ncomms10184 (2016). Supplementary Figures 1-9