Heterozygous mutations of the insulin (INS) gene have been identified as a cause of permanent neonatal diabetes mellitus (PNDM) in humans (1). Ins2NoneC96Y(Akita) and MunichIns2NoneC95Smutant mice have development of hyperglycemia early in life, reduced insulin secretion after glucose challenge, ultrastructural beta-cell alterations, and progressive beta-cell loss (2,3). These models contributed substantially to the clarification of disease mechanisms induced by misfolded (pre)proinsulin, including impaired trafficking of normal proinsulin by formation of high-molecular-weight complexes with mutant (pro)insulin (4), accumulation of misfolded insulin in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), and ER stress (5). ER stress triggers beta-cell apoptosis and diabetes mellitus when it exceeds a certain level (6). Although there is increased degradation of misfolded insulin molecules (7), beta-cell failure finally occurs. WhereasIns2mutant mouse models provided important mechanistic insights, they have limitations for translational studies. To establish a large animal model of PNDM, we generated transgenic pigs expressing a mutant porcineINSgene (INSC94Y) that resembles the humanINSC96Ymutation and the mutation of the Akita mouse. All animal experiments were performed according to the German Animal Welfare Act with permission of the responsible animal welfare authority. TheINSC94Yexpression vector including the porcineINSgene with the G- greater than A transition leading to a Cys- greater than Tyr exchange at amino acid position 94 as well as its essential regulatory elements and a neomycin selection cassette (neo) (Fig. 1None) were nucleofected into male primary porcine fetal fibroblasts, and pools of stable nucleofected cell clones were used for nuclear transfer to generate transgenic founder pigs (8). Genotyping was performed by PCR using the transgene-specific primers 5'-CAG CTG TGC TCG ACG TTG TC-3' and 5'-GAG TCA ACT AGT CCT CAG AAG AAA G-3', and Southern blot analysis using a32P-CTP-labeled probe specific for the neo cassette (Fig. 1None). For transgene expression studies, total RNA was extracted from pancreatic tissue (RNeasy Kit; Qiagen), DNaseI-treated (Roche), and reverse-transcribed with SuperScriptII (Life Technologies) using random hexamer primers. INSC94Yand wild-typeINScDNAs were amplified by PCR using insulin-specific primers 5'-TTT TTA TCC GCA TTC TTA CAC GG-3' and 5'-ATC TTC CTC AGC TCC TTC CAG G-3', and their ratio was determined by next-generation sequencing of RT-PCR amplicons (Genome Analyzer IIx; Illumina; greater than 10,000 reads per sample). Generation of diabeticINSC94Ytransgenic (tg) pigs (expression construct, Southern blot, glucose levels, transgene expression). A: Expression cassette including the porcineINSgene with the Cys- greater than Tyr exchange at amino acid position 94, essential regulatory elements, and a neomycin selection cassette (neo). Restriction site ofBamHI and binding site of the probe (bar) used for Southern blot analysis are indicated. B: Southern blot analysis ofBamHI digested genomic DNA fromINSC94Ytg pigs and littermate control animals (wt) showing different integration sites in founders 9725, 9726, 9727, 9728, 9745, 9746, and 9747. Tg offspring (1334, 1336, 1340, 1341) of founder 9747 show the same integration pattern as founder 9747, demonstrating a single integration site. C: Fasting blood glucose levels ofINSC94Ytg founder boars showing hyperglycemia in founder 9747 progressively deteriorating over time, whereas blood glucose levels of the six other founders remain within the reference range (70-115 mg/dL, depending on the laboratory); arrow indicates start of insulin therapy. D: Quantification ofINSC94Yand wtINStranscripts in pancreatic tissue ofINSC94Ytg pigs by next- generation sequencing of RT-PCR amplicons. Founder 9747 shows at least five-fold higher expression of the mutantINSC94Ycompared with the other six founders (F0) and similar expression compared with its F1 offspring (F1;n= 3). Inset: RT-PCR products ofINSC94Y/INStranscripts in pancreatic tissue of allINSC94Ytg founders (left)and founder 9747, as well as its offspring (right). M, pUC Mix Marker; gDNA, genomic DNA; H2O, Aqua bidest. Animals were housed under controlled conditions, had a once-daily feeding regimen, and had free access to water. Body weight was recorded regularly. Random and fasting blood glucose levels were determined regularly using a Precision Xceed glucometer and Precision XtraPlus test stripes (Abbott). Intravenous glucose tolerance, homeostasis model assessment of beta-cell function, and homeostasis model assessment of insulin resistance were determined as described previously (9,10). Continuous glucose monitoring was performed using the Guardian REAL-Time System (Medtronic) whereby a glucose sensor was inserted subcutaneously behind the ear and data were transferred via a connected transmitter to an external computer. Plasma insulin levels were determined by radioimmunoassay (Millipore). Insulin-treated pigs received a combination of long-acting insulin (Lantus; Sanofi) and short-acting insulin (NovoRapid; NovoNordisk). Blood glucose levels were determined once or twice daily using a glucometer to control treatment. The 8-day-old and 4.5-month-old pigs were killed and subjected to routine necropsy. Selected organs were weighed. Pancreas samples for quantitative stereological analyses were chosen by systematic random sampling and were routinely processed for paraffin histology (9). beta-cells and non-beta-cells were visualized as described (9) using a polyclonal guinea pig antiporcine insulin antibody or polyclonal rabbit anti-human glucagon, somatostatin, and pancreatic polypeptide antibodies, respectively. The volume densities and the total volumes of beta-cells and non-beta-cells were determined as described previously (9). For transmission electron microscopy of beta-cells, pancreas samples were fixed in 6.25% glutaraldehyde in Sorensen phosphate buffer (pH 7.4) for 24 h and processed as described (3). The left kidney was fixed by orthograde vascular perfusion with 4% formaldehyde. Six specimens of the renal cortex obtained by systematic random sampling (11) were processed for plastic embedded light microscopy (11) and transmission electron microscopy as described previously (11). The mean glomerular volume was determined from the mean glomerular profile area, as described (11). The true harmonic mean thickness of the glomerular basement membrane (GBM) was determined by the orthogonal intercept method (11). Tibial nerve fascicles were immersed in 2.5% glutaraldehyde in Soerensen phosphate buffer (pH 7.4) for 1 h and postfixed in 2% OsO4for 2 h. After a graded alcohol series, they were embedded in epoxy resin. Semithin sections (0.5 mum) were stained with azur II-methylene blue-safranin. Some nerve fascicles were prepared for fiber teasing as reported previously (12). All data are presented as means +/- SEM unless indicated otherwise. Longitudinal data of blood glucose levels and body weight gain were statistically evaluated by ANOVA (PROC MIXED; SAS 8.2), taking the fixed effects of group (transgenic versus control) and age as well as the random effect of animal into account (9). For other parameters, the two-tailed unpaired Mann-WhitneyUtest in combination with an exact test procedure (SPSS 19.0) or two-tailed unpaired Studentttest was used unless indicated otherwise. P less than 0.05 was considered significant. A total of 562 embryos reconstructed fromINSC94Ynucleofected cell clones were transferred to five recipient gilts, resulting in three pregnancies, two of which went to term. Southern blot analysis revealed that all seven offspring wereINSC94Ytransgenic, with different transgene integration patterns (Fig. 1None). Founder boar 9747 exhibited elevated fasting blood glucose levels at the age of 85 days, further increasing with age. The boar showed distinct growth restriction, which could be substantially improved by insulin treatment. Transgenic offspring were delivered after mating 9747 to wild-type sows and showed the same transgene integration pattern as the sire, arguing for a single integration site in the genome. The other sixINSC94Ytransgenic founder boars had normal development and exhibited unaltered glucose levels (Fig. 1None) and intravenous glucose tolerance (data not shown) within the observation period of 213 days. TheINSC94Y-to-INStranscript ratios in pancreas samples of 9747 and his diabetic offspring (n= 3) were 0.75 and 0.78 +/- 0.05. In the other founder boars, this ratio was at least five-fold lower (Fig. 1None), indicating that the diabetogenic effect ofINSC94Yis dose dependent. To evaluate the effect ofINSC94Yexpression on glucose homeostasis, blood glucose levels were measured regularly beginning at birth before the first food intake. Transgenic offspring exhibited significantly (P less than 0.05) elevated random blood glucose levels within 24 h after birth compared with their nontransgenic littermates (Fig. 2None). However, divergence in basal plasma insulin levels of 8-day-oldINSC94Ytransgenic pigs compared with controls was less pronounced (Fig. 2None). In contrast, fasting insulin levels of 4.5-month-oldINSC94Ytransgenic pigs were significantly (P less than 0.01) reduced compared with nontransgenic littermates (Fig. 2None). Homeostasis model of assessment of beta-cells index was significantly reduced in 4.5-month-oldINSC94Ytransgenic pigs (1.8 +/- 0.4 vs. 47.2 +/- 10.5;P less than 0.01, one-tailed), indicating reduced steady-state beta-cell function. Homeostasis model of assessment of insulin resistance index was significantly elevated in 4.5-month-oldINSC94Ytransgenic pigs (2.4 +/- 0.48 vs. 1.2 +/- 0.24;P less than 0.05, one-tailed), suggesting insulin resistance. For long-term survival,INSC94Ytransgenic pigs were treated with insulin starting at the age of 4.5 months. Glucose control under insulin treatment was evaluated over a period of 42 h, and the average blood glucose concentration in theINSC94Ytransgenic pigs was 123.2 +/- 41.9 (SD) vs. 92 +/- 11.9 (SD) mg/dL in the control pigs (Fig. 2None). Variations in blood glucose levels were generally greater in theINSC94Ytransgenic (40-198 mg/dL) than in the control pigs (62-114 mg/dL). Glucose control and insulin secretion inINSC94Ytransgenic (tg) pigs. A: Random blood glucose levels (left) ofINSC94Ytg pigs and littermate controls (wt) up to age 8 days. Glucose levels of tg pigs are significantly elevated 24 h after birth. Random and fasting blood glucose levels (right) of tg and wt pigs show deterioration of glucose control in tg pigs with increasing age. B: Fasting insulin levels of 8-day-old and 4.5-month-oldINSC94Ytg pigs and littermate controls reveal hypoinsulinemia in 4.5-month-oldINSC94Ytg pigs vs. littermate controls. C: The 42-h continuous glucose monitoring of an insulin-treatedINSC94Ytg pig and a nontransgenic control (wt) pig. Insulin dose per day: 0.5 to 1 units per kilogram of body weight. IGC, interstitial glucose concentration. Data are means +/- SEM. *P less than 0.05; **P less than 0.01; ***P less than 0.001 vs. control. Pancreas weight did not differ betweenINSC94Ytransgenic pigs and controls at 8 days of age (4.4 +/- 0.6 vs. 4.9 +/- 0.4 g;P= 0.5) but was significantly reduced in 4.5-month-oldINSC94Ytransgenic pigs compared with nontransgenic littermates (79 +/- 6 vs. 134 +/- 5 g;P= 0.001), proportionate with body weight reduction. Qualitative histological evaluation of the pancreas revealed single beta-cells and small islet clusters in 8-day-oldINSC94Ytransgenic pigs to the same extent as in controls (Fig. 3None). Compared with nontransgenic littermates, pancreas sections of 4.5-month-oldINSC94Ytransgenic pigs revealed a visibly reduced beta-cell mass and insulin immunostaining intensity (Fig. 3None). The volume density and total volume of beta-cells in the pancreas of 8-day-oldINSC94Ytransgenic pigs were unaltered compared with controls. However, in 4.5-month-oldINSC94Ytransgenic pigs, the volume density of beta-cells in the pancreas, total volume, and the total volume of beta-cells related to body weight were diminished by 54, 72, and 53%, respectively (Fig. 3None). Electron microscopy revealed unaltered secretory granules but dilation of the ER in 8-day-old transgenic piglets and a low number of insulin secretory granules and severe dilation of the ER in beta-cells of 4.5-month-old transgenic pigs (Fig. 3None). The volume density of non-beta-cells in the pancreas was not altered in 4.5-month-oldINSC94Ytransgenic pigs. The total non-beta-cell volume ofINSC94Ytransgenic pigs was reduced by 38% (290 +/- 39 vs. 472 +/- 59 mm3;P less than 0.05); however, in relation to body weight, their total non-beta-cell volume was not different from that of controls (6.5 +/- 0.8 vs. 6.0 +/- 0.5;P= 0.9). Reduced beta-cell mass and ultrastructural changes inINSC94Ytransgenic (tg) pigs. A: Immunohistochemical staining for insulin in 8-day-old pigs and double immunohistochemical staining for insulin (pink) and glucagon, somatostatin, and pancreatic polypeptide (brown) in 4.5-month-old pigs. Representative histological sections of pancreatic tissue from a control (wt) and anINSC94Ytg pig. Scale bar = 50 um. B: Quantitative stereological analyses of the pancreas. Unaltered total beta-cell volume (V(beta-cell, Pan)) in 8-day-oldINSC94Ytg pigs (n= 4 per group) and significant reduction of V(beta-cell, Pan)in 4.5-month-oldINSC94Ytg pigs (n= 7 per group) compared with littermate controls. Data are means +/- SEM. ***P less than 0.001 vs. control. C: Transmission electron microscopy of pancreatic tissue from a representative 8-day-old and 4.5-month-oldINSC94Ytg and a littermate control (wt) pig. In 4.5-month-oldINSC94Ytg pigs, only a few insulin granules (arrows) and severe dilation of endoplasmic reticulum (*) are visible, whereas in 8-day-old tg pigs insulin granules are present and dilation of the endoplasmic reticulum is less severe. INSC94Ytransgenic pigs grew normally up to an age of 2 months; thereafter, their growth rate decreased, resulting in a 41% lower body weight at the age of 4.5 months (Fig. 4None). The weights of most organs, including the pancreas, were proportionately reduced (data not shown). A notable exception was kidney weight, which was reduced by only 15%. Thus, relative kidney weight was significantly increased (Fig. 4None). Further, the ratio of glomerular volume to body weight was significantly increased in 4.5-month-oldINSC94Ytransgenic pigs (Fig. 4None). However, there were no histological signs of diabetic kidney disease in 4.5-month-old diabetic pigs (Fig. 4None) or in 1-year-old cloned diabeticINSC94Ytransgenic pigs (n= 5; kindly provided by Minitube of America). Also, there was no histological evidence for diabetic neuropathy in 4.5-month-oldINSC94Ytransgenic pigs (Fig. 4None). In contrast, cataract was observed at the edges of the eye lenses in 8-day-oldINSC94Ytransgenic pigs, whereas at 4.5 months of age the entire lens was affected (Fig. 4None). Diabetes-related alterations ofINSC94Ytransgenic (tg) pigs. A: Body weight gain inINSC94Ytg pigs (red circles;n= 9) and controls (blue circles;n= 7) up to age 4.5 months. B: Increased relative (rel.) kidney weight (percent body weight) and ratio of mean glomerular volume to body weight (BW) (v[glom] / BW [um3/kg] * 103) in 4.5-month-oldINSC94Ytg pigs vs. littermate controls (wt;n= 7 per group). C: Unaltered true harmonic mean thickness of the GBM in 4.5-month-oldINSC94Ytg pigs compared with littermate controls (n= 3 per group) and representative transmission electron microscopic sections. Scale bar, 500 nm. D: Representative histological sections (left) of a tibial nerve fascicle of a 4.5-month-oldINSC94Ytg pig and a littermate control demonstrating unchanged fiber density without structural changes in axons and myelin. Azur II-methylene blue-safranin staining. Scale bar, 100 um. Single fiber teasings (right) showing unchanged fiber myelinisation and morphology of nodes of Ranvier. Scale bar, 100 um. E: Eye lenses of 8-day-old and 4.5-month-oldINSC94Ytg pigs and littermate controls (wt) show a progressive cataract with increasing opacity in tg pigs, whereas lenses of wt pigs remain clear. Data are means +/- SEM. *P less than 0.05 vs. control; ***P less than 0.001 vs. control. US, urinary space; CL, glomerular capillary lumen; p, podocyte foot process. In this study, we established the first transgenic pig model of PNDM triggered by anINSmutation. Induction of insulin-deficient diabetes by other methods has substantial drawbacks. Chemical diabetes induction, e.g., by streptozotocin treatment, is hampered by variable outcomes, including age, sex, or individual differences in susceptibility or spontaneous reversal of diabetes (13). Pancreatectomy is highly invasive, time consuming, and expensive, and it requires supplementation of the pancreatic enzymes (14). In contrast,INSC94Ytransgenic pigs have development of stable diabetes because of a specific clinically relevant impairment of beta-cells. Unaltered blood glucose levels and body weight at birth suggest postnatal disturbance of beta-cells, although impairment of (pro)insulin action to some extent during fetal development cannot be excluded. Like theIns2mutant mouse models, theINSC94Ytransgenic pig model does not reflect all disease mechanisms of human type 1 diabetes because of the lack of the autoimmune component. Importantly,INSC94Ytransgenic pigs can be propagated by conventional breeding when treated with insulin. However, the costs for maintenance of pigs ($3.30 per animal and per day in our facility) and, in particular, of diabetic pigs ($12 per day) are markedly higher than for rodent models. Expression ofINSNonetranscripts at a level of 75% of the endogenousINSmRNA was sufficient to cause hyperglycemia already in newborn transgenic pigs, whereas beta-cell mass was initially unaltered. Nevertheless, structural alterations of beta-cells suggested ER stress already at this early stage. At the age of 4.5 months, ratio of beta-cell mass to body weight of transgenic pigs was significantly reduced and was associated with marked ultrastructural evidence for loss of insulin granules and ER stress. Because insulin staining was used to identify beta-cells, we may have overestimated the reduction of beta-cell mass attributable to loss of insulin granules. Nevertheless, our findings indicate that theINSC94Ytransgenic pig model reflects the disease mechanisms demonstrated inIns2mutant mice and imposed in human PNDM. Binding affinity of INSC94Ymight differ from endogenous INS, which possibly could have led to accompanying insulin resistance in cases of higher binding affinity of INSC94Y(15). However, in vitro studies usingdesmutants of human insulin showed that each of the three disulfide bonds is essential for receptor binding affinity, and that lack of the A7B7 interchain disulfide bond has the greatest impact on binding affinity (16). In addition, it remains to be clarified if INSC94Yis at all secreted from beta-cells because in vitro studies suggest failure of INSC96Yto undergo exocytosis in response to glucose (17-19) and that mutant misfolded proinsulin also affects bystander proinsulin in the ER (4). The growth rate of untreatedINSC94Ytransgenic pigs was markedly reduced as compared with controls. This is in line with stunted growth of diabetic children with insufficient insulin therapy (20) and underlines the essential role of insulin as growth factor and anabolic hormone. Whereas the weights of most organs ofINSC94Ytransgenic pigs revealed proportional reduction in body weight, the relative kidney weight was increased by 29%. Renal and glomerular hypertrophy is a common early-stage finding in diabetic patients (21); however, histopathological examination did not reveal alterations diagnostic for diabetic nephropathy inINSC94Ytransgenic pigs. Whereas the thickness of the GBM is an early and sensitive indicator of diabetic kidney disease in mice (11), it takes years until thickening of the GBM can be detected in human diabetic patients, and even longer until clinical diabetic nephropathy is present (22). Therefore, it is not surprising that GBM thickness is still unaltered in 4.5-month-oldINSC94Ytransgenic pigs. Future studies need to address if time or complicating factors such as high-protein diet or elevated blood pressure (23) will provoke kidney lesions in diabeticINSC94Ytransgenic pigs. The lack of kidney pathology in youngINSC94Ytransgenic pigs is in contrast to findings in a diabetic transgenic pig model expressing mutant hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha. Immature renal development and liver alterations were detected in two hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha transgenic-cloned piglets, whereas two others revealed glomerular hypertrophy and sclerosis. Whether these lesions were attributable to the dominant-negative effects of mutant hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha, secondary changes attributable to chronic hyperglycemia, or anomalies associated with somatic cell nuclear transfer remains unclear (24). Structural changes in peripheral nerves possibly will develop with increasing age inINSC94Ytransgenic pigs because chronic sensorimotor diabetic polyneuropathy is highly dependent on diabetes duration in humans (25). Similar to humans,INSC94Ytransgenic pigs have development of remarkable cataracts, which never has been reported inIns2mutant mice. This might be related to a lower aldose reductase activity in lenses of mice compared with humans and rats (26). Therefore, pigs seem to be a favorable model for diabetic cataracts, although the underlying molecular mechanism has to be clarified. A number of interesting questions can be addressed with this novel pig model for PNDM. A genetically diabetic pig model facilitates testing the functionality of transplanted pancreatic islets, e.g., after microencapsulation or in specific macrodevices (27), in an organism of human size. Also,INSC94Ytransgenic pigs seem to be a valuable model for preclinical testing of novel treatment strategies to improve glucose control. The reproducible loss of beta-cells makes theINSC94Ytransgenic pig an attractive model for the development of in vivo imaging techniques to monitor beta-cell mass. Developmental consequences of maternal diabetes on oocytes and embryos and their interaction with the maternal environment are other interesting research topics. Because of the similarities in oocyte maturation and early development of human and pig embryos (28), theINSC94Ytransgenic pig is an attractive model to address these questions.