Hydrogen sulfide (H2S), traditionally known as a venomous gas with a stinky smell, has been recently recognized as an important signaling molecule. None-NoneH2S is generated in mammalian cells by enzymes including cystathionine beta-synthase (CBS), cystathionine gamma-lyase (CSE), and 3-mercaptopyruvate sulfurtransferase (3-MST), and cysteine and derivatives serve as the substrates. None-NoneRecent studies have revealed a variety of functions of H2S in physiological and pathological processes. None-NoneHowever, the mechanisms behind those roles are still poorly understood. H2S is a highly reactive molecule that can react with many biological targets such as hemoglobin and phosphodiesterase. NoneThese reactions are responsible for the biological functions of H2S. On the other hand, these complicated reactions also make the detection of H2S in biological systems very difficult. Early reports claim physiological H2S concentrations can be as high as 20-80 muM in plasma. However, it is believed now that the concentrations of free H2S are low, at submicromolar or nanomolar levels. NoneIn the past several years fluorescence based assays have received considerable attention in this field and a number of fluorescent probes for H2S have been reported. NoneAll of these probes utilize reaction-based fluorescence change strategies, i.e. using certain H2S-specific reactions to convert nonfluorescent substrates to materials with strong fluorescence or to change the fluorescent properties of the probes (for ratiometric probes). Currently three types of reactions are normally used in the design of probes: (1) H2S-mediated reductions, often using azide (-N3) substrates;None(2) H2S-mediated nucleophilic reactions;None,Noneand (3) H2S-mediated metal-sulfide formation. NoneIn 2011 our laboratory developed the first nucleophilic reaction based strategy for the design of probes (i.e.,WSPseries). NoneThe strategy is described in Scheme1. The probe (WSP) contains two electrophilic centers. H2S reacts with the pyridyl disulfide first to give a persulfide intermediate1, which precedes a fast cyclization to release the fluorophore and 1,2-benzodithiol-3-one2. It is anticipated that the probe can also react with biothiols to form3. Theoretically3could further react with H2S to form1and then turn on the fluorescence. However, this reaction is somewhat slow, especially when the concentration of H2S is low (under physiological conditionsNone). In addition, H2S may react with both sulfurs of the disulfide of3, which makes this pathway not productive. It should be noted that the reaction betweenWSPand biothiols cannot turn the fluorescence on; therefore, the selectivity ofWSPis found to be excellent. We were also able to optimize the detection conditions and found fluorescence "turn-on" could be achieved in a few minutes. Such a fast reaction allows effective detection of H2S even when high concentrations of biothiols are presented, albeit the fluorescence signals are significantly decreased. NoneAs described above, the possible consumption ofWSPprobes by biothiols is a weakness. To solve this problem two strategies may be applied: (1) a H2S-specific "trapper" should be used to replace the pyridyl-disulfide. Such a trapper should only react with H2S, not react with biothiols. This might be difficult as intracellular concentrations of biothiols are much higher than H2S; (2) a nonconsumptive trapper with biothiols should be identified and used. Such a trapper may react with biothiols, but the reaction should not lead to the release of the fluorophore. Moreover, ideally the reaction product or intermediate should maintain high reactivity toward H2S which therefore can lead to fluorescence "turn-on" by H2S. Herein we report our progress in pursuing the latter strategy. Diselenide-based substrates were found to be suitable for this goal. Our design of the diselenide-based strategy for the selective trapping of H2S (not consumed by biothiols) is shown in Scheme1. It is known that diselenide bonds can be cleaved by sulfur-based nucleophiles very effectively (about 5 orders of magnitude faster than disulfide bonds). None,NoneIt is also known that diselenides can facilitate disulfide formation from thiols. NoneH2S (pKa6.8) is a stronger nucleophile than common biothiols such as Cys and GSH. Therefore, we expect diselenide-based reagents such as4should react with H2S very effectively. As such two products should be formed: a thio-benzeneselenol derivative5and a benzeneselenol derivative6. As an extremely unstable intermediate, benzeneselenol6should be rapidly oxidized to reform the probe4. NoneIn contrast,5should undergo a fast and spontaneous cyclization to form 1,2-benzothiaselenol-3-one7and release the fluorophore. We also expected the diselenide bond should be quite reactive to biothiols (RSH). Such reactions should lead to two products:6and a S-Se conjugate8. Again,6should be oxidized to regenerate the probe. As for8, previous studies revealed that nucleophilic attack by thiols at selenium is both kinetically much faster and thermodynamically more favorable. NoneAs such, the reaction between8and other biothiols should not change the probe's structural template (i.e., maintaining the -S-Se- conjugation). However, if H2S is present, the reaction should lead to intermediate5, and the following cyclization should produce7and the fluorophore. Overall we expected the probe would specifically react with H2S to release the fluorophore and the presence of biothiols should not interfere with the process. With this idea in mind, a model compound9was prepared and tested. As shown in Scheme2, the reaction between compound9and H2S (5 equiv, using Na2S as the equivalent) was found to be fast, which completed in 10 min. The desired products7and phenol were obtained in excellent yields. The yield of7was calculated based on two selenium moieties in the starting material. We did not observe the formation of the benzeneselenol product in the reaction. When Cys (10 equiv) coexisted with H2S (5 equiv) in the reaction, we obtained the same products in high yields. More interesting, even if Cys (5 equiv) was treated with9first for 1 h, the addition of H2S (2.5 equiv) still provided the desired products in similar yields. These results supported our hypothesis that diselenide-based substrates could selectively and effectively react with H2S to form the cyclized product7and this reaction was not affected by thiols. Based on this unique reaction we synthesized two fluorescent probesSeP1andSeP2(shown in Figure1). 7-Hydroxycoumarin and 2-methyl TokyoGreen were selected as the fluorophores, as they have excellent fluorescence properties and their fluorescence can be easily quenched upon acylation on hydroxy groups. Structures of diselenide-based probes. With these two probes in hand, we tested their fluorescent properties. Both probes exhibited very weak fluorescence with low quantum yields (Phi less than 0.1), due to esterification of the fluorophores. We then tested the probes' fluorescence responses to H2S in different solvent systems, and a mixed CH3CN/PBS buffer (10 mM, pH 7.4, 1:1) solution was found to be the optimum system for the measurement. In this system the fluorescence intensity of the probe (10 muM) could reach the maximum in less than 2 min upon treatment of H2S (using 50 muM Na2S) as shown in Figure2, demonstrating this was a fast process. Fluorescence increases were also found to be significant. Intensities increased 35- and 14-fold for probeSeP1andSeP2respectively. When a series of different concentrations of Na2S were treated with the probes we observed fluorescence intensities increased in almost a linear fashion in the range 0-15 muM. Data obtained withSeP2are shown in Figure3. The detection limit ofSeP2was calculated to be 0.06 muM. Data ofSeP1are shown in Figure S1 in theSupporting Information. Time-dependent fluorescence changes of the probes (10 muM) in the presence of Na2S (50 muM). The reactions were carried out for 30 min at room temperature in CH3CN/PBS buffer (10 mM, pH 7.4, 1:1, v/v). Data were acquired at 455 nm with excitation at 340 nm forSeP1(?) and at 521 nm with excitation at 498 nm forSeP2(?). Fluorescence emission spectra ofSeP2(10 muM) in the presence of varied concentrations of Na2S (0, 0.5, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 15 muM). The reactions were carried out for 5 min at room temperature in CH3CN/PBS buffer (10 mM, pH 7.4, 1:1, v/v). Data were acquired with excitation at 498 nm forSeP2. We also examined the selectivity of the probes for H2S over other reactive sulfur species, including cysteine (Cys), glutathione (GSH), sulfite (SO32-), sulfate (SO42-), and thiosulfate (S2O32-). As shown in Figure4, all of these species did not show a significant fluorescence increase even under much higher concentrations (up to mM). In addition, when H2S (50 muM) coexisted with Cys or GSH (1 mM), we observed strong fluorescence responses that were comparable (at ?90% levels) to the signals obtained with H2S only. This was a significant improvement from our pyridyl disulfide based probes, which gave much decreased fluorescence when high concentrations of biothiols were present (at 25-55% levels of the signal of H2S only). NoneFluorescence intensity of the probes (10 muM) in the presence of various reactive sulfur species: (1) control; (2) 50 muM Na2S; (3) 200 muM Na2SO3; (4) 200 muM Na2S2O3; (5) 200 muM Na2SO4; (6) 1 mM Cys; (7) 1 mM GSH; (8) 50 muM Na2S + 1 mM Cys; (9) 50 muM Na2S + 1 mM GSH. SeP1(A),SeP2(B). Next we testedSeP2in imaging H2S in cells. Freshly cultured HeLa cells were first incubated withSeP2(50 muM) for 30 min and then washed with DMEM to remove excess probe. We did not observe significant fluorescent cells (Figure5). However, strong fluorescence in the cells was observed after treating with Na2S (100 muM) for 30 min. These results demonstrated thatSeP2could be used for cell imaging. Fluorescence images of H2S in HeLa cells usingSeP2. Cells were incubated with the probe (50 muM) for 30 min, then washed, and subjected to different treatments. (a and b) Control (no Na2S was added); (c and d) treated with 100 muM Na2S (scale bar: 100 nm). Finally we wondered ifSeP2could be used to measure endogenous H2S concentrations changes. To this end, human neuroblastoma cells (SH-SY5Y) were separately treated withl- andd-cysteine (which are H2S biosynthestic substrates),S-adenosylmethyonine (SAM, a CBS activator), and aminooxyacetic acid (AOAA, a CBS inhibitor). SeP2was loaded into each experiment before or after treatments (see detailed protocols in theSupporting Information). Fluorescence intensities were measured by a plate reader and compared to both negative and positive controls. As shown in Figure6, cells treated with H2S substrates or CBS activator showed clearly enhanced fluorescence while cells treated with CBS inhibitor showed decreased fluorescence. Not surprisingly cells treated with Na2S showed the strongest fluorescence. These results suggest thatSeP2can be used in determining endogenous H2S changes. Fluorescent detection of in situ generated H2S in human neuroblastoma cells (*P less than 0.05, **P less than 0.01, ***P less than 0.001 vs control;N= 5 each). In conclusion, we reported herein a unique reaction between phenyl diselenide and H2S to form 1,2-benzothiaselenol-3-one. The presence of thiols did not affect this process. Based on this reaction two fluorescent probes for the detection of H2S were prepared and evaluated. The probes showed excellent sensitivity and selectivity.