Novel display materials have gained keen attraction recently in the fields of electronics and photonics research especially owing to the rapid evolution of smart communication devices123. Among the various display materials available, organic semiconductors or metal-organic compounds are considered to be very promising, and they have therefore been intensely investigated456. An alumina quinoline, tri (8-hydroxyquinoline) aluminium (Alq3), first reported approximately three decades ago, which emits in the green and blue spectra, is a material of central interest789. Alq3is currently used in a multitude of organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs)10111213that are used in various displays. Since it was first reported, enormous improvements have been made in its light emission efficiency, to provide higher display quality1415161718. One peculiar approach incorporates a biological material into the light-emitting device, often called a BioLED19. An example is DNA in the form of a thin film introduced within a conventional electroluminescent cell incorporating an Alq3layer20. Utilized in the device were double-strand DNAs (dsDNAs) extracted from natural organisms and complexed with cationic surfactants; the device provides ?30-fold increase in luminescence intensity21. This phenomenon was attributed to the contribution of the DNA layer to the electron blocking effect, thus reducing significant loss of electrons and enhancing electron-hole recombination in the cell20. Luminescent dyes entrapped within dsDNA thin films reported22also exhibited higher intensity owing to less non-radiative relaxation. This novel capability of DNA is noteworthy as a gadget in light-emitting devices. The value of the devices can be recognized even higher as they incorporate the 'bio-recognition function'. Current BioLEDs now face a new journey to the realm of biological recognition. To this end, this study presents a critical step endowing an OLED material with a biological recognition function. We demonstrate for the first time that only specific DNA-DNA recognition triggers photoluminescent enhancement reflected by Alq3, the most widely used OLED material. We first observed the characteristic alteration when Alq3particles incorporating single-strand DNA (ssDNA) moieties interacted with specific target DNA (tDNA) molecules. Crystallization of Alq3has been conventionally executed with the aid of surfactants and recently become successful using ssDNA molecules only23. With guidance from ssDNA, we fabricated prismatic hexagonal rod crystals composed of Alq3. In this study, the oligomeric ssDNA used for crystal guidance was a 27-mer sequence of anthrax lethal factor. Figure 1ashows a schematic illustration of the recognition of specific tDNA by the light-emitting Alq3rod crystallized by ssDNA. Figure 1b,cprovide colour charge-coupled device (CCD) images of the ssDNA-guided Alq3(ssDNA-Alq3) rods before and after treatment with tDNA molecules, respectively. We observed the ssDNA-Alq3rods emitting green luminescence. Interestingly, the intensity of the green luminescence of the ssDNA-Alq3rods was markedly enhanced after interaction with specific tDNA molecules. For quantitative analysis of the intensity enhancement, we measured the photoluminescence (PL) spectra of the Alq3rods. As shown inFig. 1d, a broad PL peak was observed at ?512 nm when samples were excited with a laser at 365 nm, which corresponds to the main absorption band of Alq3. The PL spectra were yellowish-green, composed of both alpha and delta phases8924. After interaction with specific tDNA molecules, the PL peak intensity increased ?1.6-fold, which is concordant with the results of the CCD analysis. Interestingly, when treated with single-base (1-mer) mismatched tDNA molecules that are less specific, the Alq3rods showed little enhancement of PL intensity. In addition, PL excitation (PLE) spectrum analysis confirmed the enhancement of PL intensity, as shown inFig. 1e. The intensity with excitation at 365 nm and emission at 512 nm was clearly higher following treatment with specific target molecules. To further explore the PL enhancement of the Alq3rods after interaction with specific tDNA molecules, we selected four crystal samples of ssDNA-Alq3, ssDNA-Alq3treated with specific tDNA, ssDNA-Alq3treated with 1-mer mismatched tDNA and dsDNA-Alq3(dsDNA-guided Alq3rods crystallized by the use of dsDNA molecules from the start). X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were observed, as shown inFig. 2a, to examine structural changes in the Alq3crystals. The XRD pattern of the ssDNA-Alq3rod showed typical alpha-phase peaks for Alq3at 11.40 degrees and 12.81 degrees , along with a delta-phase peak at 11.79 degrees . Hence, the ssDNA-Alq3rods fabricated in this study contain both alpha- and delta-phases89252627, which is consistent with the yellowish-green luminescence observed in the PL analyses. Upon interaction with specific tDNA molecules, the rods showed an XRD pattern almost identical to that of the initial Alq3rods, except that two additional peaks appeared at 10.59 degrees and 13.31 degrees . The source of these two peaks was identified as the dsDNA forming the helical structure2829. These two peaks were also evident in the dsDNA-Alq3sample, in which the double-helix DNA structure was formed before the crystallization. In a very clear comparison, these two peaks were completely absent in the case of ssDNA-Alq3rods treated with 1-mer mismatched tDNA molecules, indicating that nearly no helical dsDNA was present. The morphological features of the four Alq3crystals were observed by field-emission scanning electron microscopy (SEM), as shown inFig. 2b. The ssDNA-Alq3rods showed a regular prismatic hexagonal shape with a smooth surface, similar to the morphology of Alq3rods fabricated using the surfactant, cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (Supplementary Fig. 1)30. Upon interaction with specific tDNA, the initially smooth surface of the Alq3rods became rough. A rough surface was not observed either following treatment with 1-mer mismatched tDNA or in the sample of dsDNA-Alq3rods. Therefore, the Alq3rods only showed a significant enhancement in PL following interaction with specific tDNA, accompanied by the following interesting features: diffraction peaks indicative of double-helix DNA and surface roughening. To observe the roughened surface more closely, we employed high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HR-TEM) of the ssDNA-Alq3rods, before and after interaction with specific tDNA molecules. In comparison with the prismatic hexagonal shape of the ssDNA-Alq3rods (Fig. 3a), interaction with specific tDNA resulted in formation of an 120-nm thick crust layer surrounding the inner core of the rod of which the whole thickness is 800 nm, as shown inFig. 3b. In the magnified HR-TEM images of regions near the rod edges as shown inFig. 3c,d, the surface crust layer was observable to a small degree in ssDNA-Alq3rod, but increased markedly upon specific tDNA interaction. We can estimate, from the HR-TEM image (Fig. 3b), the volume ratio of the crust layer in the Alq3rod to be 50 vol% (Supplementary Fig. 2). It is noted that such a crust layer was completely absent in the reference case, the cetyltrimethylammonium bromide-guided Alq3rod (Supplementary Fig. 1). Hence, it is rational that the increased crust layer was induced by the recognition of specific tDNA by the ssDNA present in the Alq3rod. To confirm the positioning of the DNA molecules, we used ssDNA and specific tDNA molecules labelled with Cy3 and Cy5 fluorescent dyes, respectively. The distribution of the DNA molecules was visualized by tracing the corresponding dye moieties using a confocal laser scanning microscope (CLSM) capable of excitation with a 555-nm laser with a variable-wavelength filter. Strikingly to observe inFig. 3e, the ssDNA-Cy3 molecules showed a very unique distribution in the shape of an 'inverted' hourglass over the Alq3rod. DNA molecules have recently been shown to play a role in crystallization23and to act as an alternative to surfactants. A conventional concept of crystallization regarding the role of surfactant molecules (that is, wrapping around particulate seeds and resulting in subsequent crystallization) was found to be invalid for the DNA molecules used for the crystal guidance, at least in the present case. A detailed understanding of why the ssDNA molecules are distributed in this unique manner is presently lacking. How the ssDNA molecules having the inverted hourglass distribution interact with the tDNA molecules is investigated next. Tracing of the dye moieties showed that the tDNA-Cy5 molecules were only present on the rod's outer periphery, which emitted red fluorescence as shown inFig. 3f. Interestingly, the unique distribution of ssDNA molecules is nearly maintained. Thus, we can infer that recognition of the tDNA molecules by the ssDNA molecules occurred only in the region limited to the roughened surface but not in the inner core. Hence, the abovementioned 120-nm thick surface crust, shown inFig. 3b, was induced by specific DNA-DNA recognition. In the next stage, we investigated precisely where in the Alq3rods the enhanced PL originates, that is, the inner core, the surface crust, or the entire rod. To compare the PL intensity of the crust layer and inner core of a single Alq3rod, we again employed CLSM, but with excitation at 405 nm, to excite the Alq3molecules. From the rod having thickness of 11 mum, we acquired two-dimensional cutting-plane images, one from the uppermost surface layer and the other at the depth of the 2.5-mum below the surface, and thus below the crust. Specific DNA-DNA recognition occurred andFig. 4ashows a comparison of the uppermost surface layer (left) and the 2.5-mum inner planes (right), corresponding to the crust layer and the inner core, respectively. We observed that the upper plane was markedly brighter than the inner plane. We quantified this phenomenon using a profiling analysis of the rod crystals in a longitudinal direction, as shown inFig. 4b; the PL intensity of the upper plane (indicated by red line) was ?2-fold higher than that of the inner plane (black line). In contrast, the upper plane was a little brighter than the lower in the ssDNA-Alq3rod, as shown inFig. 4c,d. Therefore, careful comparison of the PL intensity of the crust layer and the inner core, in addition to analyses of structural variation and molecular profiling, enables us to conclude that specific DNA-DNA recognition caused the increase in the surface crust layer, the very region responsible for the PL enhancement. Thus, Alq3, one of the most widely used OLED materials, becomes capable of DNA-DNA recognition. This novel phenomenon can be explained by the following mechanism:Fig. 5suggests a cross-sectional schematic illustration of the Alq3rod recognizing the specific tDNA and the energy-level diagrams for both crust layer and inner core. No shift at the main absorption peak of the Alq3rods before and after the recognition was found, which was also true for ssDNA and hybridized rods (Supplementary Fig. 3). This indicates that specific DNA-DNA recognition did not induce any changes in the bandgap of the Alq3rods. As illustrated in the energy diagram, DNA has a wide bandgap such that the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital energy level was -0.9 eV and the highest occupied molecular orbital level was -5.6 eV, whereas the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital and highest occupied molecular orbital levels of the yellowish-green Alq3were -3.3 and -6.1 eV, respectively2021. We analysed fluorescence lifetimes to evaluate the effect of the DNA-DNA interaction on luminescence enhancement. The average lifetime was measured to be 1.28 ns for the ssDNA-Alq3rods and evidently increased to 1.63 ns after specific DNA-DNA interaction, indicating that DNA recognition evokes enhanced prevention of non-radiative relaxation of Alq3molecules (Supplementary Fig. 4andSupplementary Table 1). Hence, the PL intensity is enhanced only in the limited region of the surface crust layer, where specific recognition event occurs. In summary, the Alq3, a molecular organic semiconductor, crystallized and functionalized with ssDNA molecules is found capable of recognizing biological interaction, for the first time. The crystal's luminescent intensity is enhanced by 1.6-fold upon label-free recognition of perfect-matched tDNA sequence, but not in the case of single-base mismatched one. Specific DNA-DNA interaction induces double-helix DNA structure on the crystal's surface crust layer that is analysed to be responsible for longer fluorescence lifetime and the increase in the luminescent response. This study signifies a new direction of OLED materials toward unprecedented bio-recognitive photonic functions and applications. Commercial Alq3powder was dissolved in tetrahydrofuran at a concentration of 1 mg ml-1, to form a stock solution. The stock solution (2 ml) was injected into 20 ml of various aqueous DNA solutions at a concentration of 0.5 muM, with vigorous stirring (?800 r.p.m.) for 10 min. The mixture was stored at room temperature (RT) overnight to allow formation of visible precipitate. The ssDNA used in this fabrication had a sequence of NH2-5'-ATC CTT ATC AAT ATT TAA CAA TAA TCC-3'; this ssDNA, hybridized with its complementary sequence, was used as the dsDNA. The ssDNA used in this experiment was the amine-terminated anthrax lethal factor probe DNA sequence (NH2-5'-ATC CTT ATC AAT ATT TAA CAA TAA TCC-3'). The fabricated ssDNA-Alq3rods were reacted with complementary tDNA (3'-TAG GAA TAG TTA TAA ATT GTT ATT AGG-5') at a concentration of 0.5 muM at 52 degrees C for 30 min and then returned to RT. The 1-mer mismatched tDNA sequence used in this study was 3'-TAG GAA TAG TTA CAA ATT GTT ATT AGG-5'. The surface morphology of the Alq3rods was analysed using a field-emission SEM (Hitachi, S-4300) using an acceleration voltage of 15 kV. Powdered samples of Alq3rods were cast on an ultrathin carbon-coated Cu grid or a holey carbon-coated Cu grid and images were captured using an HR-TEM (Tecnai G2, Fei) with an acceleration voltage of 200 kV. The powder XRD (Bruker, D8 Advance with DaVinci) patterns were captured at a voltage of 40 kV, a current of 40 mA and Cu-Kalpha radiation (lambda=1.540 A). The scanning rate was 0.02 degrees s-1, and the 2thetarange was captured from 2 degrees to 20 degrees . A fluorescence spectrophotometer (Hitachi, F-7000) was used for measuring PL and PLE spectra excited by a Xe lamp. A CLSM (Carl Zeiss, LSM700) was used for measuringz-sectioning fluorescence images of the isolated single Alq3rod, ssDNA molecules, and tDNA molecules. For this analysis, Alq3rods were fabricated with ssDNA-Cy3 (NH2-5'-ATC CTT ATC AAT ATT TAA CAA TAA TCC-3'-Cy3) and tDNA-Cy5 (3'-TAG GAA TAG TTA TAA ATT GTT ATT AGG-5'-Cy5) to visualize the interactions with ssDNA. The Alq3molecules were guided by ssDNA and were excited at 405 nm and detected with a 300-550 nm filter. The ssDNA-Cy3 molecules present in the Alq3rod were excited at 555 nm and detected with a 300-630 nm filter. In addition, the tDNA-Cy5 molecules recognized by the Alq3rods were excited at 555 nm and detected with a 630-800 nm filter. The Alq3rods were analysed using az-stack of images collected at 100 nm intervals through the * 20, * 40 and * 100 objective lenses. Fluorescence lifetimes of the solution-phase samples were obtained with an Edinburgh Instruments FL920 Fluorescence Lifetime spectrometer equipped with 376.6-nm pulsed-diode laser at RT. Quantum yields were measured using IESP-150B (Sumitomo Heavy Industries Advanced Machinery Co. Ltd.) equipped with a Xe lamp (CW500W). How to cite this article:Back, S. H.et al. Bio-recognitive photonics of a DNA-guided organic semiconductor. Nat. Commun. 7:10234 doi: 10.1038/ncomms10234 (2016). Supplementary Figures 1-4 and Supplementary Table 1