Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) represents a well co-ordinated series of molecular changes in epithelial cells including loss of E-cadherin expression, increased vimentin and N-cadherinNoneand rearrangement of cortical actin, imparting an increased migratory capacity to the resulting mesenchymal cells. NoneThe timing and extent of EMT is essential for fetal development but is also associated with diseases such as fibrosis and cancer metastasis. None,NoneIn tumors, EMT imparts a more aggressive phenotype, ultimately resulting in metastasis by direct local tissue invasion or distantly through blood vessels and lymphatics. NoneThe prototypic stimulus for EMT is TGF-beta, which induces phosphorylation of beta-catenin and subsequent activation of transcription factors including Snail. NoneTGF-beta is not alone in its ability to induce EMT and various other growth factors and transmembrane receptors have been implicated, including the integrins. None,None,NoneIntegrins are matrix adhesion receptors that can transduce bi-directional signals to regulate cancer cell migration and invasion facilitating mechanisms such as EMT, depending upon available ligand and their interactions with membrane receptors. None-NoneIntegrins alpha3beta1, alpha5beta1, and alphavbeta6 have all been shown to modulate TGF-beta induced EMT through distinct mechanisms in a variety of tumor cell lines. None,None-NoneEMT induces an increase in both alphavbeta6 and alpha5beta1 expression to facilitate cell migration: alphavbeta6 through autocrine TGF-beta activation,Noneand alpha5beta1 through binding of autocrine fibronectin. NoneIntegrin alpha3beta1 facilitates cell-cell adhesion by formation of a complex with E-cadherin and beta-catenin. NoneIn kidney and lung epithelium alpha3beta1 complexes with E-cadherin and TGF-betaR1 and its activation is required for beta-catenin phosphorylation. None,NoneIntegrin alpha9beta1 is expressed in human cancers and appears to correlate with higher grade tumors. None-NoneAlthough we have recently shown that integrin alpha9beta1 plays a role in lymphangiogenesis,None-Noneand angiogenesisNone,Nonethe exact mechanisms by which it transduces a pro-cancerous effect is unclear. Since integrins have been implicated in EMTNoneand having shown that alpha9beta1 induces accelerated cancer cell migration through src, a signaling intermediate implicated in cancer metastasis,None,Nonewe postulated that alpha9beta1 might promote carcinoma growth and metastasis via src mediated EMT. We have previously used SW480 colon carcinoma cellsNonetransfected with integrin alpha9beta1Noneand observed that, compared to mock cells, alpha9-transfected SW480 (Fig 1A) displayed a more spindle shape, suggestive of a mesenchymal phenotype. Immunoflourescent staining (Fig 1A) and immunoblots of cell lysates (Fig 1B) showed that compared to mock, SW480-alpha9 expressed less E-cadherin, more alpha-SMA and vimentin and demonstrated loss of cortical F-actin; all molecular changes consistent with EMT. These molecular changes increased significantly with alpha9beta1 activation, and were associated with increased expression of the transcriptional repressor Snail (Fig. 1C), further supporting the notion that alpha9beta1-induces EMT. In contrast, SW480-mock did not demonstrate these changes when activated by the common integrin ligand, plasma fibronectin (pFN). Transient alpha9-overexpression in other cancer cell lines also resulted in similar EMT changes measured by immunoblotting (Suppl. Fig-S1A) and immunocytochemistry (Suppl. Fig-S1B); helping to rule out the confounding effect of cell type. The functional consequences of EMT include increased cell migration, invasion and anchorage independent growth; all of which were increased with expression of alpha9beta1. Figure 1Dshows that alpha9beta1 expression increases both haptotaxis and chemotaxis of SW-480 cells; which were associated with an increased cellular expression of N-cadherin and loss of cortical actin, both markers of increased migratory capacity (Figure 1C). Furthermore, expression of alpha9beta1 was associated with a time dependent increase in invasion, increasing further when cells were treated with alpha9beta1 ligand and significantly decreased by alpha9-specific inhibitors (Fig 1E). Lending further support to the notion that alpha9beta1 induces a transformed phenotype, SW480-alpha9 were found to have increased anchorage independent growth (Suppl. Fig S1-C). Taken together, these results suggest that alpha9beta1 can induce a more aggressive cancer cell phenotype by inducing EMT. Having recently shown src is essential for alpha9beta1 signalingNoneand knowing src is implicated in EMTNonewe investigated its role in alpha9beta1-associated EMT. Fig 2Ashows that association of src with integrin alpha9beta1 is facilitated by alpha9beta1 ligand and depends on the alpha9 subunit and not beta1 (Fig 2B). During EMT there is loss of cell-cell contact resulting from beta-catenin phosphorylation and disruption of the beta-catenin/E-cadherin complex at the adherens junction. NoneFig 2Cshows that ligation of alpha9beta1 induces phosphorylation of src-Y416 and also beta-catenin-Y654, the tyrosine phosphorylation site associated with EMT. NoneSrc also mediated alpha9beta1-induced beta-catenin phosphorylation and changes in E-cadherin and vimentin expression consistent with EMT (Suppl. Fig S2-A). In non-alpha9 expressing SW480 neither src nor beta-catenin phosphorylation were significantly induced by pFN, suggesting other beta1-integrins are not playing a role (Fig 2C). Similar to other integrins,None,Nonewe found that alpha9beta1 co-localizes with both beta-catenin and E-cadherin on the cell surface (Fig 2D). This co-localization is disrupted following alpha9beta1 activation in SW480-alpha9 cells (Fig 2E) and appears to be mediated by src (Suppl. Fig S2-C). Although the dissociation of this tripartite protein complex may be secondary to loss of E-cadherin function, when taken together our results appear to support a direct effect of alpha9beta1-associated EMT. Furthermore, targeted knockdown of beta-catenin in SW480-alpha9 cells decreased E-cadherin and increased vimentin expression and were associated with functional changes consistent with EMT: increased cell migration, invasiveness and decreased proliferation (Fig 2F). In contrast, expression of E-cadherin and vimentin did not change significantly when cells were exposed to src-targeted siRNA, and migration and invasion were significantly less (Fig 2F, left panel). beta-catenin is also a component of the Wnt signaling pathway which is associated with EMT. None,NoneOur data shows that wnt signaling does not appear to play a role in alpha9beta1-associated EMT (Suppl Fig S3). Blocking wnt signaling either by Dickkof1 (Dkk1), a Wnt signaling antagonistNoneor by siRNA-mediated knockdown of lipoprotein receptor-related protein-6 (LRP6), the major wnt co-receptor, did not show any effect on alpha9beta1 mediated pro-EMT changes in E-cadherin or vimentin (Suppl Fig S3A,B,D) or on the invasiveness of cancer cells (Suppl Fig S3C,E). Since integrins alpha3beta1 and alphavbeta6 are known to regulate EMT through beta-catenin phosphorylationNone,Nonewe next determined if these integrins might influence alpha9beta1-associated EMT. Using flow cytometry we found minimal expression of alphaVbeta6, no differential expression between SW480-mock and alpha9 cells (Suppl. Fig S4-A) and that expression was unaltered by culture conditions, type of matrix (Suppl. Fig S4-A) or cell culture time (data not shown). Integrins alpha3beta1 and alphavbeta6 modulate EMT through their interactions with TGF-beta, and modulating downstream SMAD2 signaling. None,NoneHowever, we found no difference in SMAD2 phosphorylation in SW480-mock or SW480-alpha9 at baseline or following stimulation by ligand: pFN (common ligand to alpha3beta1 and alphavbeta6) or alpha9-specifc ligand, TnfnRAA (Suppl. Fig S4-B). Furthermore, alpha9beta1 expression in cancer cells did not alter TGF-beta induced EMT (Suppl Fig S4-C) nor did TGF-beta change cellular expression of alpha9beta1 (Suppl Fig4D). Taken together these results suggest that unique to the integrins, alpha9beta1 can induce EMT independent of TGF-beta. In cells expressing alpha9beta1, total beta-catenin is significantly decreased (Fig 2C) suggesting that beta-catenin is either trafficking to the nucleus or undergoing proteasomal degradation. Supporting this notion, we found proportionally greater accumulation of nuclear beta-catenin in SW480-alpha9 compared to mock cells suggesting that at least in part, there is increased transcriptional activity (Suppl. Fig S5-A). This is further supported by the increased proliferative capacity of SW480-alpha9, which can be blocked by inhibiting alpha9beta1 (Suppl. Fig S5-B,C). We next performed tumor experiments to determine the pro-carcinogenic effects of alpha9beta1 in-vivo. Tumors formed in mice from flank injection of SW480-alpha9 cells were up to 3 times larger than tumors formed from SW480-mock cells (Fig 3A), were associated with increased intra-tumoral angiogenesis and lymphangiogenesis (Fig 3B) and displayed altered cadherin and vimentin expression consistent with EMT (Fig 3C). Also consistent with an EMT phenotype, animals injected with SW480-alpha9 cells demonstrated significantly greater metastasis with marked inguinal lymphadenopathy and widespread lung and liver metastases (Fig 3D). In contrast, only infrequent metastases could be detected in mice injected with SW480-mock cells (data not shown). Having shown that EMT and metastatic cell behavior can be induced by the exogenous over-expression of alpha9beta1, we next determined whether endogenously expressed integrin in lung cancer cells had a comparable action. Using flow cytometry (Fig 4A) and immunoblotting (Fig 4B) we found that alpha9beta1 expression was variable but appeared more robust in human SCLC compared to NSCLC. In addition, LLC1, a mouse model cell line for lung carcinoma, also expressed integrin alpha9beta1. Compared to normal bronchial epithelium (NHBE), these cancer cell lines showed evidence of EMT, as measured by E and N-cadherin expression. However, those cells expressing alpha9beta1 demonstrated relatively less expression of E-cadherin and higher expression of N-cadherin and the extent of colony formation by these cancer cells on soft agar was dependent on the extent of alpha9beta1 expression (Suppl. Fig S6-A,B). Integrin alpha9beta1 appears to induce a functionally relevant EMT phenotype in these lung cancer cells as demonstrated by increased alpha9beta1-dependent adhesion (Fig 4C), migration (Fig 4D) and Matrigel invasion (Fig 4E). Although the overall extent of the response varied, they were mostly proportional to the magnitude of alpha9beta1 expression. alpha9beta1-associated EMT was dependent on the expression level of the integrin. The change in expression of E-cadherin and vimentin following alpha9beta1 activation was comparable to that induced by TGF-beta in high alpha9beta1-expressing LLC-1, intermediate in the minimally expressing A549, while NHBE or H69 cells showed no significant change in expression of E-cadherin and vimentin (Fig 4F). Taken together these findings support a physiologically relevant role for endogenous alpha9beta1 in the induction of EMT in human cancer cells in vitro. Having shown that endogenously expressed alpha9beta1 confers an EMT phenotype and more aggressive cancer attributes, we next assessed EMT when alpha9 expression was suppressed using alpha9-targeted lentiviral shRNA (Fig 5A). As expected alpha9 depleted LLC-1 demonstrated significantly decreased adhesion on TnfnRAA (Fig 5B) whereas cell adhesion to pFN, a non-alpha9beta1 ligand, was not affected. Similarly, migration and invasion (Fig 5C, D) were significantly decreased in cells expressing alpha9-targeted shRNA suggesting an inhibitory effect on EMT. This inhibition of adhesion, migration and invasion was accompanied by changes in EMT markers. Compared to control LLC-1, alpha9-depleted cells grown on alpha9beta1-specific ligand, demonstrated neither a decrease in E-cadherin nor an increase in vimentin, alphaSMA or Snail, suggesting that the process of alpha9beta1 induced EMT was blocked (Fig 5E). Furthermore, the alpha9beta1 specific ligand, TnfnRAA, did not significantly activate the pro-EMT signaling intermediates, Src or beta-catenin. Taken together these findings provide further support for alpha9beta1 inducing physiologically relevant EMT through src signaling. The relevance of alpha9beta1-associated EMT in vitro was confirmed by in vivo tumor studies using shRNA to deplete LLC1 cells of alpha9. Fig 5Fdemonstrates that tumors formed by alpha9-depleted cells (shRNA-alpha9), were at least half the size of those formed from cells with endogenous expression of alpha9beta1 (shRNA-Cont). Furthermore, cancer cell metastasis was negligible in mice injected with alpha9-depleted LLC-1 compared to those injected with cells expressing alpha9beta1 (Fig 5G). Based on our in vitro and in vivo data, we postulated that the extent of alpha9beta1 expression in SCLC might correlate with the severity of disease. We analyzed SCLC tissue from fifteen patients and found variable alpha9beta1 expression both by immunoblot (Fig 6A) and RT-PCR (data not shown). Tumors from three separate patients, were also used for immunohistochemistry which confirmed the expression of alpha9beta1 on the surface of SCLC cells (Fig 6B). Subsequently, we were able to separate patients based on the extent of alpha9beta1 expression in their tumor tissue: eleven high expressers and four low expressers. Fig 6Ctables the characteristics of the patients in relation to the degree of alpha9beta1 activity and is highlighted by significant differences in stage of disease and survival time. The average survival for patients with high alpha9beta1 was 19 mo compared to 30 mo in patients with low alpha9beta1 expression (p less than 0.001), (Fig 6D). The cellular mechanisms that induce EMT are complexNone,None,Noneand a role of integrins has been well established under the paradigm of TGF-beta induced EMT. NoneIn contrast, our findings show that in cancer cells, alpha9beta1 expressed exogenously or endogenously can trigger EMT, in a TGF-beta independent fashion and that expression of alpha9beta1 and its pro-EMT effects are not modulated by TGF-beta. These results suggest there is at least one distinct integrin pathway regulating EMT; which is not surprising since tumor stroma provides a rich supply of integrin ligands. NoneAlthough we did not examine expression of all integrins, our findings also suggest that alpha9beta1 does not require or promote the increased expression of other known pro-EMT integrins such as alphavbeta6 or alpha3beta1. Other transmembrane receptors are known to partner with integrins to induce EMT without a growth factor stimulusNonesuch as the serine protease TMPRSS4, which requires the synergistic action of active integrin alpha5beta1 (ref. 35). Whether alpha9beta1 functions in concert with other transmembrane proteins to facilitate EMT is yet to be determined. Integrin alpha9beta1 also distinguishes itself from other integrins such as alpha5beta1 and alpha3beta1 since its pro-EMT effect is transduced without a requirement for a change in expression. Following ras transformation of mammary epithelial cells the resulting increased expression of alpha5beta1 does not initiate EMT,Noneand expression of alpha3beta1 alone is not sufficient to induce EMT as suggested by alpha3-null alveolar cells which express similar amounts of E-cadherin to alpha3 expressing cells. NoneAlthough TGF-beta does induce increased expression of alphavbeta6, it is unknown whether the exogenous expression of alphavbeta6 might itself induce EMT. However, this would seem unlikely since the function of increased alphavbeta6 is to activate autocrine derived TGF-beta. NoneWhether integrin alpha9beta1 induces autocrine TGF-beta production and presumably activation of TGF-beta receptor is yet to be determined but seems unlikely since we found no significant SMAD2 activation under our experimental conditions. Our findings implicate src as a signaling intermediate for alpha9beta1-associated EMT acting by facilitating disassociation of E-cadherin and beta-catenin, which is consistent with previous reports showing src induced effects on the cytoskeleton and E-cadherin/beta-catenin. NoneThe relevance of these molecular effects was confirmed by the inhibition of cancer cell migration and invasion, both functional EMT effects. In human carcinomas the role of src is well established with more than half of lung carcinomas demonstrating aberrantly activated src. None. Further cancer research should focus on determining whether co-expression of alpha9beta1 directly contributes to the deregulation of src activity or if alpha9beta1 can induce EMT in cells lacking activated src. The importance of alpha9beta1 in human cancer is supported by reports of its expression in breast, brain and lung cancer. None,None,NoneWe show for the first time a clinical relevance for high expression of alpha9beta1 in SCLC namely a decreased patient survival by 11 months. These findings are tempered by the low number of patients included in our study which reflects clinical practice in which few patients undergo surgical procedures for diagnosis or treatment. This not withstanding, our results suggest that future research should focus on confirming these findings. Taken together with our previous work it appears alpha9beta1 may promote the cancer process through multiple mechanisms including effects on cell migration and invasion, induction of nitric oxide production,NoneangiogenesisNoneand lymphangiogenesisNone,Noneand now promotion of EMT. Our findings present cancer researchers with novel approaches to not only deciphering the carcinogenic trigger but also to better understand the interplay between the seemingly separate EMT mechanisms of TGF-beta and integrin alpha9beta1. Furthermore, our findings highlight the need for developing novel therapies targeting more than one pathogenic pathway and identify integrin alpha9beta1 as a strong candidate for pharmacotherapy in human cancer. Mouse monoclonal antibodies to alpha9beta1: Y9A2, NC4, polyclonal anti alpha9-serum and TNfnRAA (gift from Dr. Dean Sheppard, UCSF); mAb against murine alpha9beta1 (R D), beta-Actin and GAPDH (Sigma), E-cadherin, N-cadherin and beta-catenin (BD Biosciences), beta-catenin-Y654 (Invitrogen). Rabbit polyclonal antibodies: Src-Y416, SMAD2-ser245/250/255, Src, vimentin, Snail, HDAC1, Erk2 and LRP6 (Cell Signaling), anti alpha3beta1, alphavbeta6, anti-SMAD2 (Millipore); anti-alphaSMA (Santa Cruz Biotechnology), anti-CD31 (Dako), anti-podoplanin (D2-40, Covance). Phycoerythrin conjugated goat anti-mouse (Jackson Immunoresearch); Horseradish peroxidase conjugated anti-mouse and anti-rabbit antibodies (Amersham Biosciences). Plasma fibronectin (Chemicon), wnt3A and Dkk1 (R D); TGFbeta (Dr. E. Leof, Mayo Clinic), src inhibitor, PP1 (BioMol International), VLO5 (Dr. Cezary Marcinkiewicz, Temple University). SW480-alpha9 or mock cells were cultured as previously described. None,NoneA549 and Lewis lung carcinoma cells (LLC-1) cultured in F12K/DMEM medium with10% FBS. All other human lung carcinoma cell lines (ATCC) cultured in RPMI with 10% FBS. Primary NHBE cells: specialized medium (Lonza). Integrin alpha9-EGFP-N3 expression vector (Addgene, Cambridge-MA), siRNA oligonucleotides, negative control (Ambion) and siRNA to human beta-Catenin, c-Src (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) and LRP6 (Cell Signaling) performed as described previously. NoneLentivirus packaging; ViraPower Lentiviral Expression System (Invitrogen, Life Technologies). Using Lipofectamine-2000, 293FT cells were co-transfected with ViraPower DNA mix and plasmid (pLKO.1-puro) encoding shRNA targeting murine alpha9-subunit (Mayo Clinic RNA Resource) and supernatants collected 48-72 h after transfection. LLC-1 cells were transduced in the presence of 6 mug/mL polybrene (Sigma-Aldrich), and stableg clones selected in 10 mug/mL puromycin. Serum starved cells were trypsinized, washed with PBS and suspended in DMEM. In a 6-well plate, 1*10Nonecells were added to wells coated or not with 10 mug/ml TnfnRAA or pFN, incubated for various times and lysed in RIPA buffer as previously described. NoneProtein lysates from fresh frozen tissue ~50mg were obtained by pulverizing in RIPA buffer. After 20 min incubation on ice, lysates were cleared by centrifugation and immunoprecipitation and immunoblotting performed as previously described. NoneTo detect nuclear translocation of beta-catenin, nuclear and cytoplasmic proteins were extracted using 'NE-PER Extraction Reagents (Thermo Scientific) and immunoblotted for beta-catenin. Extraction purity was determined by immunobloting for Erk2 and HDAC1. Cells cultured on sterile glass cover slips were washed with PBS, fixed, and incubated with antibody in 5% normal goat serum (Upstate) at 4 degrees C overnight. Cells were washed, incubated with anti mouse Alexa Fluor-594 (or -488) antibody (BD Biosciences) for 1 hr. The cytoskeleton of fixed cells was immunostained with Texas-Red phalloidin and coverslips mounted with Slowfade containing DAPI (Invitrogen). Images were acquired as previously described. NoneCo-localization of integrin alpha9beta1 with beta-catenin (or E-cadherin) was determined using appropriate primary antibodies followed by incubation with Alexa-Fluor labeled secondary antibodies. Immunostained cells were analyzed by confocal microscopy (Zeiss/SM510); 100x oil DIC objective with ~0.5 mum optical sectioning. Single cell suspensions were rinsed and suspended in PBS at a density of 0.5-1*10Noneper ml, incubated with appropriate primary antibody for 30 min. Subsequent staining with phycoerythrin conjugated secondary antibody, acquisition and data analysis was performed as previously described. NoneCell adhesion assays were performed as previously describedNonein flat bottom 96 well microtiter plates (ICN, Linbro/Titertek) coated with 10 mug/ml TnfnRAA or FN at 37 degrees C for 1 hr, blocked with 1%BSA (Sigma) for 30 min. 5*10Nonecells suspended in basal medium were plated in each well and when indicated incubated with alpha9beta1 inhibitors; Y9A2 (20 mug/ml) or 50 muM VLO5 for 30 min. Cell migration assays were performed as previously described. None,NoneHaptotaxis: 10 mug/ml of TnfnRAA or FN for 1 hr at 37 degrees C; chemotaxis: medium with 10% FBS. 5*10Nonecells were added to the top chamber, with 30min inhibitor incubation. Migration time of 12-16 hrs at 37 degrees C. Invasion assays were performed using BD BioCoat (8 mum pore size) Matrigel chambers (Becton Dickinson-BD) as per the manufacturer's instructions. Briefly, cells treated with or without inhibitors were placed in the top chamber and 10% FBS for chemoattractant. After 14-16-hrs (A549 and LLC-1) or 24-36 hrs (SW480, SCLC lines), invaded cells were fixed, stained (Hema-3 kit, Fisher Scientific) and counted in four separate view fields by light microscopy (Axiostar, Zeiss). 2*10NoneSW480-mock or SW480-alpha9 cells in full growth medium were added to 12-well plates (Costar), trypsinized and counted using a hemocytometer. For BrdU assays cells were grown overnight in 96-well plates, in the absence or presence of 50 muM VLO5 for 16 hrs. Medium containing BrdU was added for 2 hrs and uptake measured with ELISA (RPN 250, Amarsham Biosciences) as per the manufacturer's instructions. To prevent cell settling, bottom plugs (0.5 mL, 0.8% Sea Plaque-agarose, 10% FBS/DMEM; FMC Bioproducts) were casted in 12-well plates (Costar). Top plugs (1 mL, 0.4% agarose, 10% FBS/DMEM), and 10Nonecells with or without 50 muM VLO5 were incubated for14 d at 37 degrees C. The number of colonies greater than 50 mum diameter were scored using Gelcount (Oxford Optronics). All experiments were IACUC approved and animals cared for in accordance with IACUC guidelines. 1*10NoneSW480-mock or alpha9 cells were injected subcutaneously in the flank of Nude mice (n=5). After 35 days, tumor volume was measured (lxwxh/2). To study metastasis, cells were injected through the tail vein and on day 45 tissues harvested for histology. In other experiments 0.5*10NoneLLC-1 cells were transduced with lentivirus carrying control or alpha9-specific shRNA were injected subcutaneously in the flank (n=5) or tail vein (n=3) of nude mice. The Mayo Clinic IRB approved all human studies. Fresh frozen lung cancer specimens were from the Mayo Clinic Lung Cancer Specimen Registry. Fifteen SCLC samples were analyzed for expression of alpha9beta1 and patient clinical characteristics. Histology was verified by a Board Certified lung pathologist (MCA). The patient clinical data was analyzed in a blinded fashion (BPW). Survival (months) was from diagnosis to death. Mouse tissue was fixed in 10% formalin, embedded in paraffin and 5 mum sections stained with H E or immunostained for PECAM1 (CD31) or podoplanin (D2-40). 5 Human SCLC samples and matched normal lung were immunostained with alpha9beta1 specific rabbit antibody (1:250) overnight at 4 degrees C followed by biotinylated goat anti-rabbit secondary antibody (1:200), streptavidin-peroxidase (1:100), then 3,3'-diaminobenzidine (Amresco) and peroxide. Slides were rinsed, counterstained with hematoxylin, dehydrated and mounted. Images were obtained by scanning laser microscopy (Axiostar, Zeiss) or with NanoZoomer Digital Pathology software (Hamamatsu). Unless otherwise indicated data presented as mean +/- SE from 3 or more experiments; p values determined using paired student's T-tests. Immunoblots were performed at least 3 times and representative examples presented. Statistical analysis of patient survival and clinical characteristics was performed using multivariate analysis with a p-value less than 0.05.