C-H activation mediated processes have provided a unique retrosynthetic approach to access a variety of substituted heterocycles. NoneOne tactic that has received increased attention is the coupling of pi-components with heteroatom containing molecules. NoneA variety of transition metals are capable of catalyzing this type of transformation, providing access to dozens of heterocyclic motifs. None-NoneA challenge for these methods is controlling the regioselectivity of migratory insertion across alkenes and alkynes after the metallacycle forming C-H activation (eqn 1). Steric and electronic effects are understood to control migratory insertion of unsymmetrical alkynes in Rh(iii) catalyzed isoquinolone syntheses (eqn 1). When the substituents are electronically similar, the larger group resides beta- to Rh in the metallacycle to avoid unfavorable steric interactions (selectivity is generally greater than 10 : 1). NoneWhen the substituents are electronically different, the more electron-donating group prefers being alpha- to rhodium in the metallacycle, presumably to stabilize the electron poor metal. None,NoneThe type of C-H bond being activated also plays an important role in the regioselectivity of migratory insertion; aromatic substrates typically provide synthetically useful regioselectivities when electronically different alkynes are used ( greater than 10 : 1) but alkenyl C-H activation leads to products with lower regioselectivities, presumably due to minimal steric interactions during migratory insertion. None,NoneWe found that sterically bulky di-tert-butylcyclopentadienyl ligand (CpNoneNonecomplex was ineffective at providing synthetically useful levels of selectivity. Furthermore, the CpNoneligand was only effective with aryl substituted alkynes, presumably because of strong steric interactions between the ligand and alkyne in the insertion event. NoneMigratory insertion of alkenes to access heterocycles using C-H activation chemistry is still relatively rare, with seminal studies by Glorius and Fagnou reporting the synthesis of dihydroisoquinolones. None-NoneSimilar to alkynes, alkenyl electron-donating groups favor the position adjacent to the metal in the metallacycle delivering high regioselectivity. In contrast to alkynes, aliphatic alkenes afford product with poor regioselectivity (2 : 1) (eqn 2). None,NoneWe hypothesized competing steric and electronic effects cause the low regioselectivity, with steric effects favoring the formation of a 4-substituted product and electronics favoring the formation of a 3-substituted product. NoneAs a temporary solution to this problem, our group and others have employed tethering strategies to increase the regioselectivity of the migratory insertion event (eqn 3). None,NoneOf course, regioselectivity controlled by the ligand on Rh would be the optimal solution to the selectivity problem (eqn 4). NoneConsequently, we focused our attention toward developing an intermolecular variant of this reaction that would provide product with improved regioselectivity. As a model system, we explored the impact ligands have on the coupling ofO-pivaloyl-benzhydroxamic acid1awith 1-decene2ato provide dihydroisoquinolones3aand3a'. When Cp* is used as a ligand, the desired products are isolated in excellent yield but poor selectivity (2.4 : 13a : 3a') (Table 1, entry 1). NoneReaction conditions:1a(.2 mmol), 1-decene (.2 mmol), precatalyst (1 mol%), CsOAc (200 mol%), MeOH (0.1 M). NoneCpCF3= 1-trifluoromethyl-2-3,4,5-tetramethylcyclopentadienyl. NoneCpNone= 1,2-di-phenyl-3,4,5-trimethylcyclopentadienyl. NoneCpNone= 1,3-di-t-butylcyclopentadienyl. To determine the effect that ligand electronics have on product regioselectivity, we employed an electron deficient 1-trifluoromethyl-2,3,4,5-tetramethylcyclopentadienyl ligand originally developed by Gassman (CpCF3)Noneand found that this catalyst provides3aand3a'products in good yield but without an increase in selectivity (2.4 : 1) (Table 1, entry 2). None,NoneSince ligand electronics did not appear to affect product regioselectivity, we tested an electron rich, sterically bulky di-phenyl-tri-methyl Cp ligand (CpNone) and were pleased to find a remarkable increase in selectivity from 2.4 : 1 to 12 : 1 (3a : 3a'). Pleased by this improvement, we tested the sterically bulky di-tert-butyl Cp ligand CpNoneand were surprised to find that RhCpNoneprovides the desired product in 91% yield with exquisite regioselectivity (15 : 1) (Table 1, entry 4). Having demonstrated that CpNoneis able to substantially increase the regioselectivity of alkene migratory insertion, we explored the scope ofO-pivaloyl benzyhydroxamic acids amenable to this reaction. We were pleased to findpara-substituted benzhydroxamic acids are well tolerated (50-76% yields) with both Cp* and CpNoneligands. Notably, the low regioselectivity of less than 2.2 : 1 seen using [RhCp*Cl2]2is dramatically improved with [RhCpNoneCl2]2giving excellent regioselectivities of greater than 14 : 1 (Table 2, entries 1-4). Electron rich amides derived from gallic acid provide product in excellent yield and regioselectivity (Table 2, entry 5). Finally, heterocyclic amides are both well tolerated under the reaction conditions and responsive to the sterically bulky ligand, providing product with excellent regioselectivity (Table 2, entries 6-7). NoneReaction conditions: amide (.2 mmol), 1-decene (.2 mmol), precatalyst (1 mol%), CsOAc (200 mol%), MeOH (0.1 M). NoneIsolated yield of reaction using [RhCpNoneCl2]2as a precatalyst. meta-Substituents also provide exquisite levels of regioselectivity for alkene migratory insertion when CpNoneis used ( greater than 15 : 1) (Table 3). Interestingly, when Cp* is used the C-H activation occurs exclusively at the 6-position; we suggest that this selectivity is the result of steric interactions between the 2-substituent and metal complex during concerted metallation deprotonation. Surprisingly, when CpNoneis used, the regioselectivity of the C-H activation actually decreases to afford a mixture of 2- and 6-substituted products. While on the surface the decrease of selectivity appears counterintuitive, it can be explained by the uneven distribution of steric bulk in the CpNoneligand, which we will comment on subsequently. Not only is this decrease in selectivity mechanistically intriguing, it also offers an exciting opportunity to potentially reverse the regioselectivity of C-H activation. NoneReaction conditions: amide (.2 mmol), 1-decene (.2 mmol), precatalyst (1 mol%), CsOAc (200 mol%), MeOH (0.1 M). isolated yield of reaction using [RhCpNoneCl2]2as a precatalyst. None67% yield. None80% yield. None85% yield. None79% yield. We next explored the alkene tolerance of the method. Allyl benzene2bfurnishes a 1.6 : 1 ratio of dihydroisoquinolone with RhCp* (Table 4, entry 1). When CpNoneis employed, the regioselectivity increases to 4.5 : 1. Reducing the temperature to 0 degrees C further increases regioselectivity to 5.1 : 1. Placing an electron-donating group on the aromatic ring increases the selectivity of insertion (Table 4, entry 2). Aryl electron withdrawing substituents do not, however, provide a change in regioselectivity relative to phenyl (Table 4, entry 3). When the aromatic ring is moved further from the alkene the regioselectivity observed with CpNoneincreases and yields remain high (Table 4, entries 4 and 5). Ester and ketone functional groups are tolerated without a detrimental impact on regioselectivity (Table 4, entry 6, 9, and 10). Unfortunately, alkenes bearing stereocenters are ineffective at inducing diastereoselectivity with either ligand (Table 4, entries 6 and 8). Vinyl cyclopropanes participate with good levels of regioselectivity but poor diastereoselectivity (Table 4, entry 8). Unprotected alcohols provide product in excellent yield with no sign of oxidation (Table 4, entry 7). NoneReaction conditions:1a(.2 mmol), alkene (.2 mmol), precatalyst (1 mol%), CsOAc (200 mol%), MeOH (0.1 M). NoneIsolated yield of reaction using [RhCpNoneCl2]2as a precatalyst. NoneReaction conducted at 0 degrees C.NoneProducts isolated as a 1 : 1 ratio of diastereomers. NoneProduct isolated as a 2 : 1 ratio of diastereomers. While it is desirable to achieve high regioselectivity for a single regioisomer, it is even more attractive to use a ligand to access alternate regioisomers. Currently, the only example of Rh(iii)-catalyzed synthesis of 4-substituted dihydroisoquinolones is with potassium vinyltrifluoroborates where electronics are believed to control regioselectivity. NoneWe found that when vinylcyclohexane was submitted to a reaction with [RhCp*Cl2]2as the precatalyst, the 3-substituted dihydroisoquinolone4awas isolated in 90% yield with 11 : 1 regioselectivity (Fig. 1). However, when the same reaction was catalyzed by [RhCpNoneCl2]2the opposite isomer4bwas isolated in 75% yield and 10 : 1 (4b : 4a) regioselectivity. Given this unexpected discovery, we were interested in gleaning insight into how CpNoneinfluences regioselectivity of alkene migratory insertion. A competition experiment between vinyl cyclohexane2mand 1-decene2arun to 10% conversion favored the formation of dihydroisoquinolone3ain greater than 19 : 1 ratio as determined by1H NMR. This experiment suggests that enhanced steric interactions between the substrate and ligand slow the rate of migratory insertion. To investigate the steric differences between the RhCp* and RhCpNonesystems X-ray analysis was conducted on a 5-membered RhCpNonemetallacycle. While we were unable to obtain a 5-membered rhodacycle from our system, Jones and coworkers previously characterized 5-membered rhodacycle5afromN-benzylidenemethanamine and [RhCp*Cl2]2. NoneWe found that a similar metallacycle5bderived from [RhCpNoneCl2]2could be obtained in crystalline form under identical conditions and was evaluated by single crystal X-ray diffraction. A comparison of the bond lengths and angles reveals several notable differences between our CpNonerhodacycle and the Cp* rhodacycle reported by Jones (Fig. 2). The Rh-Cp centroid distance in5bis 0.011 A longer than5awhich is either the result of increased steric interactions, or an artifact of CpNonebeing a less electron-donating ligand. While there are subtle differences in many bond lengths and angles, the most striking difference is the angle C3-Rh-Cl, which is 98.03 degrees in5bwhile only 90.09 degrees in5a. The angle increase is likely the result of steric interactions caused by thetert-butyl moiety being situated directly over the Rh-Cl bond. As alkene exchange presumably occurs with Cl, we suggest that steric interactions between thet-butyl of the ligand and the alkene substituent affect both the alkene coordination and 1,2-insertion events. Based on the X-ray crystal structure and regioselectivity data, we propose the following model for regioselectivity of the 1,2-migratory insertion of alkenes, where steric contributions from thet-butyl groups influence both alkene coordination and insertion events to give high selectivity. With small alkyl alkenes, we propose that steric interactions from onet-butyl of CpNonedisfavor alkene coordination (I) and subsequent insertion to give the beta-substituted product3a'(Fig. 3). Coordination of the alkene with the steric bulk oriented away from thet-butyl group finds minimized steric interactions during coordination (II). Subsequent migratory insertion fromIIplaces the alkyl substituent alpha to Rh in the transition state, which we propose is able to stabilize a buildup of partial positive charge, making the alpha-substituted product3aboth sterically and electronically favored with CpNone. In the case of the Cp* ligand with small alkyl alkenes, neither steric nor electronic interactions dominate so low selectivity is observed. However if the size of the alkene substituent is significantly increased, as in the case of vinyl cyclohexane, then CpNonefavors the opposite regioisomer. While certainly a puzzling result, we propose that the selectivity can be explained by CpNonerotation such that thet-butyl groups both occupy the space above the metallacycle. CpNonerotation gears theO-piv toward the alkene coordination site disfavoring alkene coordination to this side (IV) favoring the alpha-substituted product3a. At the same time, alkene coordination (III) with the cyclohexyl opposite theO-piv minimizes steric interactions enabling insertion of the large alkene and preferential formation of beta-substituted product3a'. While not conclusive, the observation that cyclohexyl alkene reacts significantly slower thann-octyl alkene suggests that migratory insertion of the cyclohexyl alkene proceeds through a higher energy and potentially highly ordered transition state, such as CpNonerotation. In conclusion, we found that sterically bulky di-tert-butyl cyclopentadienyl ligand (CpNone) is effective at increasing regioselectivity of alkene migratory insertion in the synthesis of dihydroisoquinolones by Rh(iii) C-H activation catalysis. In contrast to previous cases where Cp* delivers modest levels of regioselectivity of migratory insertion (with alkynes), CpNonerenders previously non-selective reactions (with alkenes) highly regioselective. Furthermore, ligand control (Cp*vs.CpNone) enables the highly selective synthesis of two regioisomeric products with vinylcyclohexanes. Finally, crystallographic evidence lends support for a possible explanation of the enhanced regioselectivity.