With the introduction of the 7th edition of the TNM staging system, it was suggested that this system should be used not only for staging of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) but also for small cell lung cancer (SCLC) and bronchopulmonary carcinoids. Thus, it replaces the much simpler staging system previously used for SCLC (Veteran Administration staging system) reflecting the advances in therapy and prognosis achieved recently (Table 1). NoneNoneNoneTNM staging system 7th editionT staging describes the local extent of a tumour, i.e. infiltration of adjacent structures or organs that has an effect on resectability and prognosis. In the 6th edition tumour size was only used to differentiate between T1 ( less than =3 cm) and T2 ( greater than 3 cm). This has been modified so that tumours greater than 7 cm are now classified as T3 independent of other features, and subclassifications have been introduced to describe tumours with a maximum diameter of up to 7 cm by their size more precisely: T1a ( less than =2 cm, T1b: greater than 2-3 cm, T2a: greater than 3-5 cm, T2b: greater than 5-7 cm). The other features describing infiltration of visceral or parietal pleura, mediastinum, chest wall or other organs have not been changed (Fig. 1). NoneNoneNoneNSCLC less than 2 cm. This is classified as T1a in the 7th edition and was classified as T1 in the 6th edition of the TNM staging system. N staging describes whether a lymph node metastasis is located within the visceral pleura, the ipsilateral or contralateral mediastinum, which affects therapy (surgical resection, lymphadenectomy) and prognosis. No changes to the N staging have been introduced with the 7th edition. M staging describes the presence or absence of distant metastases. These usually represent systemic and irresectable disease and a very poor prognosis. With the 7th edition a differentiation was introduced between irresectable spread in the thorax, i.e. malignant pleural and pericardial effusion (now M1a, formerly T4) and extrathoracic spread (now M1b, formerly M1) (Fig. 2). NoneNoneNoneMalignant pleural effusion and pleural tumour nodules of the left hemithorax. This is now classified as M1a (formerly T4). The changes in the T and in the M staging obviously affect tumour stages in individual cases. Otherwise, no changes have been introduced with the 7th edition.