The liver kinase B1 (LKB1) gene is mutated in Peutz-Jeghers syndrome, an autosomal dominant inherited disorder characterized by mucosal gastrointestinal polyps and increased risk for malignant tumors. None-NoneLKB1 mutation is also found in sporadic cancers, such as lung adenocarcinoma and cervical cancers. None-NonePhysiologically, LKB1 is involved in multiple processes including embryonic development, cell polarity, cell-cycle arrest, apoptosis, metabolism, and hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) maintenance. None,None-NoneLKB1 forms a heterotrimeric complex with mouse protein 25 and Ste20-related adaptor protein (STRAD), and phosphorylates at least 13 members of the AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) super family. None-NoneIt was established that LKB1 regulates cell growth and proliferation through AMPK by controlling tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) and p53. None,NoneLKB1 plays a role in the maintenance of HSC quiescence. None-NoneDeletion ofLkb1resulted in an initial expansion of HSCs and multipotent progenitor cells and eventually depletion of not only these cell populations but also mature blood cell types leading to pancytopenia. None-NoneOne of the explanations for the depletion of HSCs is that LKB1 deficiency leads to increased DNA damage in response to metabolic and genotoxic stresses. Gurumurthy et al. observed enhanced expression of phosphorylated histone H2AX (?-H2AX), a marker of DNA damage, in hematopoietic tissues of LKB1-deficient mice, indicating an altered DNA damage response (DDR) in LKB1 deficient cells. NoneConsistently, a recent study showed that LKB1-AMPK signaling regulates non-homologous end joining-associated DNA repair and contributes to genome stability. NoneThus, it seems plausible that LKB1 plays a role in DDR. Reactive oxygen species (ROS) are a source of DNA damage, in particular DNA base damage, which may lead to the accumulation of point and/or deletion mutations and contribute to tumorigenesis. None-NoneSome tumor suppressors and chemical compounds can directly regulate intracellular redox state to reduce ROS. None-NoneA DNA microarray profile assay showed that LKB1 antagonizes Ras,Noneactivation of which may induce intracellular ROS accumulation and oncogenic transformation. NoneThis study also showed that LKB1 deficient cells possess low GADD45, NAD(P)H menadione oxidoreductase 1, and lysozyme P, which may participate in oxidative responses. NoneTo address the possible role of LKB in regulating cellular oxidative response, in this study, we analyze ROS levels in genetically manipulated LKB1 cells and provide evidence showing that LKB1 protects the genome from ROS-induced oxidation by regulating antioxidant gene products. To determine whether LKB1 regulates intracellular oxidative stress response, we measured ROS levels in LKB1 intact and compromised cells. Under unstressed conditions, LKB1-null mouse embryo fibroblasts (MEFs) possessed an approximately two-fold higher ROS than wild-type (WT) MEFs did (Figure 1a). Upon exposure to H2O2, both WT and LKB1-null cells exhibited a dosage-dependent increase in intracellular ROS (Figure 1a). However, LKB1-null cells consistently showed a higher level of ROS as compared with WT cells (Figure 1a). A kinetic analysis of the induction of ROS in cells treated with 50 uM H2O2showed a consistently higher level in ROS in LKB1 null cells than in their WT counterparts (Figure 1b). We observed a similar increase in ROS in U2OS/shR-LKB1 cells, a cell line we established with a stable knockdown of LKB1 (Figure 1c). The antioxidant N-acetyl-L-cysteine (NAC) reduced ROS levels in both LKB1 intact and compromised cells and abrogated the difference between the two cell lines (Figure 1d). Together, our results suggest that LKB1 deficiency leads to elevated intracellular ROS levels. To further define the role of LKB1 in the regulation of ROS, we analyzed intracellular ROS levels in LKB1-deficient HeLa cells and stable HeLa/LKB1 cells that express ectopic LKB1. At the endogenous level, the average fluorescence intensity (O2-) of HeLa cells was approximately 25 +/- 3.2. HeLa/LKB1 cells showed a fluorescence intensity of 10 +/- 1.3, revealing a 60% lower in ROS levels (Figure 1e). Both cell lines displayed a five- to six-fold increase in the ROS levels following exposure to 5-50 uM H2O2, with ROS levels being consistently lower in HeLa/LKB1 cells (Figure 1f). The data provide further evidence that cancer cells expressing LKB1 display lower ROS levels. LKB1 activates AMPK under stress conditions, such as bioenergetics perturbation. NoneIt was reported that ROS are induced when cells are incubated with fatty acids. NoneActivation of AMPK with 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide-1-beta-d-ribofuranoside (AICAR) is capable of reducing fatty acids-induced ROS, although AICAR had no affect on ROS levels under basal conditions. NoneTo determine whether the antioxidant function of LKB1 is mediated by AMPK, we detected ROS levels in WT and AMPKa-null MEFs. Surprisingly, AMPK status did not affect intracellular ROS accumulation under endogenous and stress conditions (Supplementary Figures 1a and b). Next, we knocked down LKB1 using siRNA in WT and AMPK-null MEFs. The cells were then treated with H2O2. LKB1 knockdown increased ROS accumulation in both WT and AMPK-null MEFs. Exposure to H2O2further enhanced the accumulation of ROS in both cell lines (Supplementary Figures 1c and d). We noted that LKB1 deletion contributed to a 20% to 100% increase in intracellular ROS regardless the AMPK status (Supplementary Figure 1d). Thus, we conclude that LKB1-mediated ROS regulation is at least partially independent of AMPK. p38 and its mediated signaling are critical targets responding to ROS stress. None-NoneTo determine whether LKB1 regulates ROS accumulation through p38, we evaluated p38 signaling in response to H2O2in WT and LKB1-null MEFs. Phosphorylation of p38 and JNK was markedly lower in LKB1-null MEFs as compared with that in WT MEFs under the similar treatment, whereas activation of ERK, another MAPK family member, was not affected by LKB1 status (Figure 2a). Similarly, phospho-p38 was substantially lower in LKB1-knocked-down cells treated with H2O2as compared with that in LKB1-intact cells under the same condition (Figure 2b). Thus, our results indicate that p38 activation responding to H2O2is impaired in the absence of LKB1. To further determine the role of p38 in mediating the effects of LKB1 on ROS, we tested the activation of p38 in H2O2-treated U2OS/LKB1 cells, a cell line with stable overexpression of LKB1. Phospho-p38 was higher in LKB1 overexpression cells than in control cells when treated with H2O2. A loss-of-function LKB1 mutant, SL26, which does not associate with STRAD,Noneshowed only a marginal effect. Phospho-JNK was minimally elevated, whereas phospho-ERK was not altered by the overexpression of LKB1 (Figure 2c). Pre-treatment with NAC substantially reduced p38 activation in both LKB1 intact and depleted cells (Supplementary Figure 2). Thus, our results suggest a role of LKB1 in the activation of p38 in response to ROS. To explore whether LKB1 controls ROS through p38-regulated antioxidant enzymes,Nonewe detected the expression of glutathione peroxidase 1 (GPX1), superoxide dismutase (SOD) -1 and -2, and catalase in LKB1 intact and deficient cells. GPX1 and SOD-1 were not altered by LKB1 status and by ROS treatments in our settings (Figures 2a-c). In contrast, SOD-2 and catalase displayed an appreciable increase in LKB1 intact cells treated with H2O2, whereas elevations of these two enzymes were markedly restricted in LKB1 compromised cells with the similar treatments (Figures 2a-c). Consistently, enzyme activities of SOD and catalase were significantly lower in LKB1 deficient cells than those in LKB1 intact cells regardless of the presence or absence of H2O2 (Figures 2d and e), suggesting that LKB1 may physiologically regulate SOD and catalase antioxidant enzymes. To determine the functional outcome of amplified p38 activation in LKB1-intact cells, we detected the downstream targets of p38 in WT and LKB1-null MEFs treated with H2O2. In WT MEFs, phosphorylation of ATF-2 and MAPKAPK-2, two p38 substrates,Nonewas strikingly induced by H2O2, consistent with the activation of p38 (Figure 3a). In contrast, both ATF-2 and MAPKAPK-2 phosphorylation in LKB1-null MEFs was much less induced than that in WT MEFs by H2O2(Figure 3a). Data from genetically manipulated cells with depletion or overexpression of LKB1 recapitulated these findings (Figures 3b and c). We also investigated the activation of p38 in response to H2O2treatment in WT and AMPK-null MEFs. There was no difference between WT and AMPK-null MEFs in terms of phospho-p38 as well as its downstream targets, ATF-2, MSK1, and MAPKAPK-2 (Figure 3a), which is consistent with the notion that LKB1-mediated ROS regulation is independent of AMPK. To define the link between LKB1 and p38 phosphorylation under ROS stress, we detected the expression of protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A), one of the phosphatases that mediate the termination of p38 kinase catalytic activity. NoneThe levels of PP2A were not affected by genetic manipulations of LKB1 (Figures 3b and c). We then evaluated the activation of p38 upstream kinases under ROS stress in the presence or absence of LKB1. Deficiency of LKB1 led to a marked decrease in the activation of MAP kinase kinase (MKK) 3/6, two essential kinases mediated stresses-induced p38 activation (Figures 3a and b). NoneMoreover, ectopic expression of LKB1 increased the phosphorylation of MKK3/6 as compared with that in empty vector-transfected U2OS cells, whereas mutant LKB1 displayed only a marginal activity on MKK3/6-p38 signaling (Figure 3c). Together, our data suggest that LKB1 is required to fully activate the MKK3/6-p38 cascade under ROS stress. Low molecular weight GTP-binding proteins in the Rho family such as Rac1 and Cdc42 have been reported to activate p38 upstream kinases. None-Nonep21-activated kinases (PAKs) are another group of p38 activators by binding to Cdc42 and Rac. None,NoneInterestingly, Zhang et al recently reported that LKB1 colocalizes with and is required for the function of cdc42 and PAK1 at the cellular leading edge. NoneLKB1 interacts only with active form of cdc42 and PAK. NoneTo determine whether LKB1-mediated p38 activation involves in cdc42-PAK1, we analyzed the impact of LKB1 on cdc42-PAK1 complex formation, an essential for the activity of cdc42-PAK1 on MAP3Ks. None-NoneConsistent with previous report,NoneLKB1 could not affect the protein levels of cdc42 and PAK1 (Figure 3d). However, cdc42-PAK1 binding (complex) was substantially reduced due to lack of LKB1. LKB1 not only affected cdc42-PAK1 complex formation, but also located in the complex (Figures 3e and f). Thus, our data and previous reportNoneclearly indicate that LKB1 facilitates the formation of the cdc42-PAK complex, and hence regulates the signaling events required to activate p38 under stress conditions. To elucidate the role of p38 activation in LKB1-mediated ROS regulation, transfection of a dominant negative p38 construct (p38-DN)Noneand a specific p38 kinase inhibitor were used to inhibit p38 signaling in U2OS/shR-Ctrl and U2OS/shR-LKB1 cells followed by treatment with H2O2. Phospho-p38 decreased dramatically in cells transfected with p38-DN irrespective of the status of LKB1 and the presence of H2O2(Figure 4a). Phospho-ATF-2 and phospho-MAPKAPK-2 were also inhibited (Figure 4a). Intracellular ROS levels were significantly increased in p38-DN transfected U2OS/shR-Ctrl cells as compared to control vector transfected cells upon the treatment of H2O2(Figure 4b). A marginal further increase in ROS was observed in LKB1-depleted cells under the similar treatment (Figure 4b), which is likely due to residual p38 activity in these cells (Figure 4a). Next, we blocked p38 signaling with SB203580, a pyridinyl imidazole that inhibits the kinase activity of p38a and p38beta without affecting p38 phosphorylation. NoneAdministration of SB203580 inhibited the activity of p38 toward its downstream targets and substantially enhanced the accumulation of ROS in both U2OS/shR-Ctrl and U2OS/shR-LKB1 cells (Figures 4c and d). Similarly, inhibition of p38 in MEFs led to the accumulation of ROS (Supplementary Figures 3a and b). In contrast, PD98059 (2'-amino-3'-methoxyflavone), a flavone derivative and selective p44/42 MAPK inhibitor, did not affect LKB1-associated ROS regulation (Supplementary Figure 3c). Together, our results suggest that the integrity of p38 signaling is necessary for LKB1-mediated suppression of ROS. To validate the role of p38 in mediating LKB1-dependent ROS regulation, we established U2OS/shR-Ctrl and U2OS/shR-LKB1 cells with stable expression of pcDNA3 (Ctrl), p38-WT, and a constitutively active form of p38 (p38-CA). Phospho-ATF-2 and Phospho-MAPKAPK-2 were up-regulated in p38-CA and to a lesser extent in p38-WT stable cells regardless of H2O2stress (Figure 4eand data not shown). ROS levels were substantially reduced in U2OS/shR-Ctrl cells transfected with p38-WT and p38-CA as compared with control vector transfected cells when the cells were exposed to H2O2(Figure 4fandSupplementary Figure 4). More importantly, the levels of ROS were also markedly reduced by the overexpression of p38-CA and p38-WT in U2OS/shR-LKB1 although ectopic expression of p38-WT showed a relatively lesser effect (Figure 4fandSupplementary Figures 4b and c). Taken together, our data suggest that p38 activation is sufficient to abrogate ROS accumulation resulting from LKB1 deficiency. A direct consequence of elevated ROS is oxidative DNA damage and mutagenesis. To determine whether LKB1-mediated reduction in ROS could translate into a protective role against oxidative DNA damage, we monitored the formation of 8-oxoguanine (8-oxo-dG), a major product of DNA oxidation and a source of mutations. NoneLKB1 RNAi in U2OS and SKOV3 cells led to a 60-80% increase in 8-oxo-dG as compared with that in control cells (Figures 5a-c). In contrast, transfection of LKB1 reduced cellular DNA oxidation (Supplementary Figure 5a), supporting an antioxidant function of LKB1. Consistently, inhibition of p38 with SB203580 increased levels of 8-oxo-dG in U2OS/shR-Ctrl cells, whereas overexpression of p38-CA and p38-WT or administration of NAC markedly reversed LKB1 deficiency-induced 8-oxo-dG increase (Figure 5bandSupplementary 5b). Taken together, our data suggest that LKB1 protects the cells from oxidative DNA damage through the activation of p38 signaling. Oxidative DNA damage is known to be associated with an increased incidence of mutations. To test the contribution of LKB1-modulated antioxidant mechanism in the protection against mutations, we monitored the changes in mutation frequencies within the hypoxanthine phosphoribosyltransferase (HPRT) gene locus. Mammalian cells bear a single functional copy of thehprtgene that codes for HPRT, an enzyme catalyzes phosphoribosylation in the purine salvage pathway, as well as phosphoribosylation of purine analogues such as 6-thioguanine (6-TG) resulting in cytotoxicity. Only cells with an inactivatinghprtgene mutation are able to proliferate in the presence of 6-TG. Thus, resistance to 6-TG indicates anhprtgene mutation. NoneU2OS/shR-LKB1 cells formed 6-fold more 6-TG-resistant colonies than U2OS/shR-Ctrl cells did (Figures 5d and e). Over-expression of p38-WT in U2OS/shR-LKB1 cells reduced the number of 6-TG-resistant colonies to about 50% of those in U2OS/shR-LKB1 cells, whereas ectopic expression of p38-CA completely abolished the effect of LKB-depletion (Figure 5e). These results suggest that LKB1 suppresses the mutation phenotype in ROS-treated cells. To identify the function of LKB1 in the protection against DNA damage, we exposed LKB1 compromised and intact cells to H2O2and measured the formation and repair of DNA SSB and alkali-labile sites (mainly abasic sites) by the comet assay. The tail moment that reflects the frequency of breaks was used to quantify DNA damage. In U2OS/shR-LKB1, the level of damage induced by H2O2was considerably higher than that in U2OS/shR-Ctrl cells (Figures 6a and b). When p38 inhibitor was applied, damaged DNA tail moment was markedly extended in U2OS/shR-ctrl but not U2OS/shR-LKB1 cells. ?-H2AX, another DNA damage marker, was also increased when the cells were treated with 50-600 uM H2O2. ?-H2AX levels were much higher in U2OS/shR-LKB1 cells than in U2OS/shR-Ctrl cells (Figure 6c). Consistent with our findings that p38 mediated the response of LKB1 to ROS, p38 inhibitor enhanced and p38-CA reduced ?-H2AX formation (Figures 6d and e). Additionally, the levels of CHK1 and ATM phosphorylation following ROS treatment were also reduced in LKB1-depleted cells (Figure 6d), suggesting incomplete or delayed DNA-damage repair in addition to the previously reported impaired DNA-damage sensing function in LKB1 deficient cells. NoneTaken together, our results suggest that LKB1 protects cells from DNA damage induced by ROS and support the notion that p38 is the mediator in the process. In keeping with our data showing that LKB1 deficiency dramatically enhanced ROS accumulation (Figures 1a-c), we set out to determine whether cancer cells lacking LKB1 might be more vulnerable to ROS-mediated stress response, in particular, to drugs that further enhance intracellular ROS. To test our hypothesis, we exposed control and LKB1 knocked-down U2OS and SKOV3 cells to different dosages of H2O2and analyzed the cytotoxicity of H2O2. Indeed, depletion of LKB1 markedly sensitized the cells to H2O2, with an IC50 being 12.5 - 25 uM for LKB1 knocked down cells and 50 - 75 uM for LKB1-intact cells (Supplementary Figures 6a and b). To validate the impact of LKB1 status on cellular viability to oxidative stress, we induced LKB1 expression in A549 cells, a cell line lacking endogenous LKB1, and exposed the cells to H2O2. Induction of LKB1 substantially desensitized the cells to H2O2treatment (Supplementary Figure 6c). Consistent with our previous notion that LKB1 regulated ROS through activation of p38, application of p38 inhibitor, SB203580 enhanced the sensitivity of LKB1-intact cells to H2O2and eliminated the difference in susceptibility to H2O2between LKB1 intact and compromised cells (Supplementary Figure 7). In contrast, NAC blocked the cytotoxicity of H2O2to both cell lines (Supplementary Figure 8). Thus, our data demonstrate that LKB1 deficiency renders the cells more susceptible to ROS stress. Piperlongumine (PL) is an alkaloid isolated from Piper longum L., which possesses selective anti-cancer properties. None,NoneWe and several other groups demonstrated that PL treatment dramatically increases intracellular ROS levels, a likely mechanism by which PL exerts its selective antitumor effect. None-NoneThus, we interrogated whether LKB1 deficient cells are more susceptible to PL. We exposed cervical cancer cell lines with or without LKB1 to various dosages of PL. LKB1 deficient HeLa, SiHa, MS751, and HT-3 cells were generally sensitive to PL treatments with IC50s around 0.5 uM following a 3-day exposure. In contrast, LKB1 intact C33-A, CaSki, and ME-180 cells exhibited a relative resistance to the same treatment with IC50s of 4 uM or higher (Figure 7a,Supplementary Figure 9). Thus, our results indicate that LKB1 status may be a predictor for cellular outcomes in response to ROS-related treatments. To further validate the specific role of LKB1 in determining the sensitivity to PL, we treated C33A/shR-Ctrl and C33A/shR-LKB1 cells with 5 uM PL. We found that treatment of PL markedly increased intracellular ROS, which were further escalated by the knock-down of LKB1 (Figure 7b). More importantly, depletion of LKB1 strikingly enhanced the cytotoxicity of PL (Figure 7c). To corroborate the findings, we established inducible LKB1 expression in HeLa cells. Consistently, reconstitution of LKB1 reduced intracellular ROS accumulation and conferred a resistance on the cells to PL treatment (Figures 7d and e). Thus, our results demonstrate a crucial role of LKB1 in determining cellular sensitivity to ROS-based treatments. We then sought to determine whether p38a-CA was able to rescue ROS-induced cell death in LKB1 compromised cells. Indeed, while constitutive expression of p38a-CA significantly increased the viability of LKB1 knocked-down cells treated with H2O2, ectopic expression of p38a-CA had little effect on LKB1-intact cell viability (Figure 7f). These data suggest that the antioxidative role of LKB1 is mediated by p38. We have provided new data showing that LKB1 plays an important role in reducing intracellular ROS in response to oxidant challenge. LKB1 deficiency enhanced oxidative DNA damage and mutations induced by the accumulation of ROS. Ectopic expression of LKB1 reduced ROS and ROS-induced DNA damage and mutation. We further characterized that the protective effect of LKB1 against oxidative stress was mediated by the activation of p38 MAPK and its downstream targets, such as ATF2, SOD2, and catalase. In summary, we have proposed a working model for LKB1-induced activation of p38 and its functional outcome in response to ROS stress (Figure 7g). ROS are the major sources of DNA damage and are substantial factors contributing to the accumulation of mutations and deletions and chromosome instability, which may lead to cancer. Thus, reduction of ROS may represent a plausible mechanism underlying the tumor suppression function of LKB1. Interestingly, however, our data suggest that the antioxidant effect of LKB1 is independent of AMPK, which was thought to carry out much of the tumor suppressor function of LKB1. None,None,NoneAlexander et al reported that in response to elevated ROS, ATM activates TSC2 via the LKB1/AMPK metabolic pathway in the cytoplasm to repress mTORC1 and to induce autophagy. NoneThis ROS-mediated activation of ATM in the cytoplasm is distinct from the classical pathway for ATM activation via DNA double-strand breaks in the nucleus. Based on previous reports and our studies that stresses, such as H2O2and CDDP treatment (data not shown), enhance the accumulation of LKB1 in the nucleus and induce the colocalization of LKB1 with ATM, ATR, and other DDR proteins, we suspect that activation of LKB1 and ATM in the nucleus may still be an important pathway in response to ROS in addition to the non-classical cytoplasmic ATM-TSC2 signaling reported. NoneOur data suggest that activation of p38 through its upstream kinases was indispensable for the action of LKB1. We characterized that LKB1 was necessary for maintaining the integrity of the cdc42-PAK1 complex, which is an important activator for p38 upstream kinases (MAP3Ks). None-NoneA recent report demonstrated that LKB1 colocalizes with cdc42 and PAK1 at the cellular leading edge. NoneLKB1 functionality is required for the accurate localization of cdc42, maintaining active cdc42 levels, and downstream PAK phosphorylation. NoneThus, our results and previous reportNoneclearly indicate that LKB1 is a critical facilitator for the cdc42-PAK signaling and the following response to activate p38 under stress conditions, such as ROS, UV treatment, and inflammation. It was reported that activated p38 promotes the phosphorylation of ATF-2 and hence enhances the transcription of SOD-2. NoneIn addition, p38 activation may also stabilize the mRNA of SOD2 and catalase. None,NoneConsistent with these reports, we showed that not only was phospho-p38 reduced, but also the expression of SOD-2 and the activity of catalase and SOD were substantially decreased in LKB1 deficient cells under ROS stress. Thus, current evidence leads us to speculate that LKB1 possesses the antioxidant function most probably through p38 signaling-activated antioxidant enzymes, such as SOD2 and catalase. Normal cells maintain redox homeostasis with a low level of basal ROS by controlling the balance between ROS generation and elimination. In cancer cells, the increase in ROS generation from metabolic abnormalities and oncogenic signaling may render cancer cells more dependent on the antioxidant system and more vulnerable to further oxidative stress. NoneTherefore, increased ROS levels in LKB1 deficient cells may create an "Achilles' heel" that can be exploited to develop improved, individualized therapies against LKB1 compromised cancers by ROS inducers. Indeed, Shackelford et alNonerecently reported thatLKB1-mutant tumors were sensitive to phenformin, a biguanide compound, which is used to treat diabetes. The preferential cytotoxicity of phenformin toLkb1-deleted tumors was associated with a greater decrease in intracellular ATP, decreased mitochondrial function, and increased intracellular ROS levels, suggesting that ROS can be targeted for antitumor in the absence of LKB1. Consistent with the concept, we showed that LKB1 deficient cells were more sensitive to H2O2and PL, the latter being a nature compound that produces ROS. Thus, we anticipate that oxidative stress inducers can be an effective means of selectively eradicating LKB1 deficient cells, which comprise more than 20% cervical cancers, 30% non-small cell lung cancer, and many other cancer types. None,None,None,NoneThe U2OS, SKOV3, HeLa and MEF cells were cultured in DMEM containing 10% fetal bovine serum. LKB1 knock-down with shRNA and control cells were reported previously. NoneWT and AMPK-null MEFs were obtained from Dr. Laderoute. NoneGene transfection was performed with Fugene 6 (Roche Diagnostics Corp., Indianapolis, IN.) in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. Cell viability was determined by 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay. NoneThe GFP-LKB1, pMEP4/LKB1, and shR-LKB1 plasmids were constructed as described previously. NoneTetR-null and TetR-LKB1 lentiviral expression system was purchased from GenTarget (San Diego, CA). The pcDNA3.1/Hygro(+)-p38a WT, CA, and DN constructs originally from Dr. MousseauNonewere transfected to U2OS/shR-Ctrl and U2OS/shR-LKB1 cells and selected with 200 ug/ml hygromycin for 2 weeks. Hygromycin-resistant stable clones were pooled and passaged. Antibodies against phospho- and/or total ATM, ATR, CHK1, Histone H2AX, HSP27, JNK/SAPK, MKK3/MKK6, MAPKAPK-2, MSK1, p38a, p44/42, and PAK1 were purchased from Cell Signaling Technology, Inc. (Boston, MA). Anti-cdc42 antibody was purchased from Cytoskeleton, Inc. (Denver, CO). Anti-LKB1 antibody was purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Santa Cruz, CA). Anti-a-tubulin monoclonal antibody, SB203580, PD98059, and 6-TG were purchased from Sigma Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). Four pairs of small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) targeting human or mouse LKB1 and a non-targeting siRNA pool were purchased from Dharmacon Inc. (Lafayette, CO). 50 nM of siRNAs were used per well in a six-well plate. The method for Western blot was reported previously. NoneCells were treated with H2O2for various durations. One hour prior to the termination of the treatment, 100 ng/ml dihydroethidium was added to the medium. The cells were harvested, washed, and analyzed by flow cytometry with the red laser channel (FL-3) using a FACscan analyzer. None,NoneROS were also determined using a 96-well plate-based intracellular ROS assay as we previously reported. NoneCatalase activities were determined by spectrophotometric method as described by Slaughter and O'Brien. NoneSOD activities were estimated as per method described by Madesh and Balasubramanian. NoneCells were treated with 500 uM H2O2in serum-free and phenol-red-free medium for 2 h at 37 degrees C, fixed in absolute methanol (- 20 degrees C, 20 minutes) and permeabilized with 0.1% Triton X-100 at room temperature for 15 min. The cells were washed and stained with FITC-conjugated avidin for 1 h. Fluorescence was measured using a microplate reader or analyzed with Olympus IX51 fluorescence microscope. NoneThe mutation frequency within the HPRT locus was determined by counting 6-TG-resistant colonies. NoneCells were pre-selected in medium containing hypoxanthine, aminopterine and thymidine (HAT; Sigma) for 72 h, and grown exponentially for 1-2 weeks to allow mutations to accumulate. After the treatment, 1*106cells were seeded onto a 100 mm2-plate with medium containing 1.35 uM of 6-TG. The number of colonies was counted after 3 weeks. We followed the method for alkaline comet assay that we reported previously. NoneThe cells were treated and run in alkaline buffer for 20 min, fixed, stained, and examined under the fluorescence microscope. The Studentt-test was used for the statistical analyses between two groups unless where it is specified. P less than 0.05 was considered as statistically significant. Figure S1. LKB1 modulates ROS independent of AMPK. Figure S2. Antioxidant NAC alleviates LKB1-mediated activation of p38. Figure S3. Inhibition of p38, but not p44/42, increases ROS in MEFs. Figure S4. Overexpression of p38 prevents LKB1-deficiency-induced ROS. Figure S5. Ectopic expression of LKB1 or p38 reduces ROS-induced oxidative DNA damage. Figure S6. LKB1 deficiency sensitizes cells to ROS treatments. Figure S7. Suppression of p38 sensitizes LKB1-intact cells to H2O2 and eliminates the difference in the susceptibility to H2O2 between LKB1 intact and compromised cells. Figure S8. Antioxidant N-acetylcysteine (NAC) blocks the cytotoxicity of H2O2 to LKB1-compromised cells. Figure S9. LKB1 deficient cells are sensitive to ROS inducer, piperlongumine (PL).