Computational design has emerged in recent years as a promising tool for creating protein catalysts with tailored activities and specificities. Using this approach, mechanistically diverse chemical reactions, including transformations without biological counterparts, have been catalyzedNone-None. Although rate accelerations are still low compared to those of natural enzymes, efficiency can be enhanced substantially by directed evolutionNone,None. Retro-aldolases that promote the cleavage of 4-hydroxy-4-(6-methoxy-2-naphthyl)-2-butanone (1) to 6-methoxy-2-naphthaldehyde (3) and acetone (Fig. 1a) are, mechanistically, the most complex enzymes designed to dateNone,None. Like natural class I aldolasesNone, they exploit a multistep pathway involving amine catalysis and enzyme-bound Schiff base intermediates (e.g.,2) to convert substrate to product. Successful designs employed a catalytic motif comprising a reactive lysine residue, a hydrophobic pocket for substrate binding, and an explicit water molecule to promote proton transfers. While mechanistic and structural characterization of two representative designs has confirmed the importance of the lysine and the apolar substrate binding pocket for catalysis, other design features, such as the catalytic water, appear to be less effectively realizedNone,None. Moreover, ready optimization of the low starting activities of these catalysts (kcat/Km= 0.02 to 0.30 M-1s-1) by random mutation, both at the active site and at more distant locationsNone, raises fundamental questions about the suitability of the original design model and/or the accuracy of its implementation. To gain deeper insight into the structure, function and optimization of such systems, we evolved a weakly active, computationally designed retro-aldolase to high efficiency and characterized key intermediates along the evolutionary trajectory structurally and biochemically. Complexes of the variants with a mechanism-based inhibitor (Fig. 1b) allow direct inferences regarding catalytic mechanism to be made in each case. In addition to providing valuable feedback for the design process, our results illuminate how mechanistic innovation can lead to large increases in catalytic activity. As a starting point for this study we used the previously designed retro-aldolase RA95.0None. This enzyme was created in a (betaalpha)8barrel scaffold by introducing eleven active site mutations predicted by the Rosetta software suiteNone. It contains a reactive lysine at position 210 to facilitate carbon-carbon bond cleavage via Schiff base formation, a large hydrophobic pocket between the L1 (beta1alpha1) and L6 (beta6alpha6) loops to accommodate the substrate naphthyl ring, and a glutamate at position 53 to orient the catalytic water molecule. RA95.0 promotes the cleavage of1with a 15,000-fold rate acceleration over background (Table 1). As expected for a mechanism involving a lysine with a perturbed pKa, it exhibits a sigmoidal pH-rate profile with an inflection point at 8.1 (Supplementary Results, Supplementary Fig. 1) and a significant advantage over free lysine in solution (Table 1). The enzyme, which was designed to cleave (S)-methodol, is also enantioselective, but the preference for the (S) over the (R)-configured substrate is only 2.3-fold (Supplementary Table 1,Supplementary Fig. 1). To investigate the structural basis of binding and catalysis by RA95.0, we determined a high-resolution X-ray structure of the enzyme in complex with the mechanism-based inhibitor4(Fig. 1b). The structure at 1.10 A confirmed the overall features of the design model (Fig. 2a) with the Calpha atom root mean square deviation (rmsd) being 0.69 A for the entire protein and 1.0 A for active site residues. The L1, L6, and L7 loops, which bracket the active site and contain many of the Rosetta mutations, showed the largest deviations from the model, with rmsd values between 2 and 4 A. Despite these structural discrepancies, Lys210 adopts a conformation as in the design, which effectively lowers its pKaby placing the epsilon-amino group in a relatively hydrophobic environment. Lys210 reacts covalently with the 1,3-diketone inhibitor4, as intended, to form a vinylogous amide (6inFig. 1b). This adduct, which was well ordered in the electron density map (Fig. 2b), is linked via its C2 carbon to the epsilon-amine of the catalytic lysine. The naphthyl ring binds snugly within the designed hydrophobic pocket but is rotated by 114 degrees around its long axis relative to the model (Fig. 2a). This binding mode may reflect structural differences between the inhibitor, which has three consecutive sp2centers, and the composite transition state used for modeling, which has three sp3centers. The altered orientation causes the carbonyl group of the inhibitor to point away from Glu53 and the water molecule designed to interact with the beta-hydroxyl group of the substrate (Fig. 3a). Since the enzyme retained full activity when Glu53 was replaced by alanine (Supplementary Table 1), this residue either does not contribute to catalysis, contrary to the original design, or its function can be assumed by water in its absence. Several other ordered water molecules were observed at the active site, including a hydrogen bond donor to the enaminone beta-carbonyl group, positioned by Ser181 and several backbone amides (Fig. 3a Supplementary Fig. 2). The ability of active site waters to mediate mechanistically relevant proton transfers, in combination with the well-defined substrate binding site, may explain why RA95.0 is more efficient than simpler amine-containing aldolase mimicsNone-NoneAlthough the computationally designed retro-aldolase utilizes programmed hydrophobic interactions to activate the catalytic lysine and position the substrate for reaction, it is many orders of magnitude less efficient than natural aldolases. To augment its activity, it was previously optimized by iterative cassette mutagenesis of active site residuesNone. A robust medium-throughput assay, based on detection of the fluorescent naphthaldehyde product3, facilitated identification of more active variants. The best variant from that study, RA95.5 (Table 1), contains five active site mutations (V51Y, E53S, T83K, M180F, R182M), and one second-shell substitution (D183N)None. The appearance of a second lysine at position 83 is reminiscent of many natural class I aldolases, which exploit an additional cationic group at the active site to activate the Schiff base-forming lysine by decreasing its pKathrough electrostatic interactionsNone. Together, these changes shift the apparent pKaof the catalytic lysine by half a unit to 7.6 (Supplementary Fig. 1) and increasekcatfor cleavage of (+/-)-methodol 30-fold andkcat/Km78-fold (Table 1). Remarkably, they also invert the enantioselectivity of the catalyst to favor cleavage of (R)-methodol by 3:1 (Supplementary Table 1). To determine the origin of these effects, RA95.5 was co-crystallized with the 1,3-diketone4and its structure determined at 1.4 A resolution (Fig. 3b). Unexpectedly, this variant is modified twice by the inhibitor, once at Lys210, as in the precursor, and once at the newly introduced Lys83. The other mutations substantially remodel the active site. For example, M180F, R182M, and D183N induce a major conformational change in the L6 loop that creates a deep hydrophobic binding pocket not present in the original design (Fig. 3b), making simultaneous labeling of both active site lysines possible. Active site plasticity may also have facilitated generation of the new reaction center: the L1, L6 and L7 loops of RA95.5, which are not involved in crystal contacts, exhibited significantly higher B-factors than the rest of the structure (Supplementary Fig. 3), consistent with enhanced mobility. The Lys210 side chain is displaced from its position in RA95.0, as is the adjacent L7 loop, due to a steric clash with the bulky aromatic residues introduced at positions 51 and 180. Although the naphthyl ring of the appended inhibitor still docks in the same hydrophobic pocket its orientation is almost perpendicular to the original binding mode. In the case of Lys83, two distinct conformations are detected for the side chain and the ligand, which are populated to similar extents (Supplementary Fig. 4). Despite this heterogeneity, mutagenesis studies showed that this residue is more effective than Lys210 as a catalytic group under normal turnover conditions. Replacement of Lys83 with methionine reducedkcatandkcat/Kmfor the cleavage of (+/-)-methodol 3- and 14-fold, respectively, whereas replacement of Lys210 with methionine leftkcatunchanged and increasedkcat/Km2-fold (Supplementary Table 2). Although both sites effectively compete for substrate at high concentrations, the more buried Lys83 has a ~30-fold advantage over Lys210 under sub-saturating conditions, perhaps because it is better shielded from bulk solvent. As previously reportedNone, introducing just the T83K mutation into the RA95.0 scaffold increases catalytic activity by less than 5-fold. An engineered double mutant T83K/K210M of RA95.0, in which the lysine originally introduced by design is replaced by methionine, was also roughly 4-fold more active than RA95.0 (Supplementary Table 2). Comparison of the double mutant with K210M RA95.5, which also lacks the original lysine, suggests that the other favorable mutations identified during the active site optimization procedure preferentially enhanced the small intrinsic advantage exhibited by Lys83 over Lys210, presumably by helping to establish the alternative substrate binding pocket. The emergence of the second reaction center can plausibly explain both the shift in apparent pKavalue of the catalytic residue and the inversion in stereochemistry observed for RA95.5. Interestingly, mutagenesis studies suggest that progenitors of natural aldolases may have exhibited similar mechanistic ambiguityNone,None. When the Schiff base-forming lysine in deoxyribose 5-phosphate aldolase (DERA) is mutated to arginine, for instance, its role can apparently be assumed by a supporting active site lysine on the neighboring beta-strand with only minor losses in activityNone. The promiscuous RA95.5 variant was subjected to multiple rounds of fully random gene diversification using error-prone PCRNoneand DNA shufflingNone. The most active clone from the fifth round of directed evolution, RA95.5-5 (Table 1), contained six additional mutations, three of which are in or near the active site (E53T, S110N, G178S) and three (R23H, R43S, T95M) on the protein surface. It was greater than 20-fold more efficient than RA95.5 and greater than 1,700-fold more active than the originalin silicodesign (Table 1). Moreover, the (R) selectivity of the catalyst increased to greater than 5:1 (Supplementary Table 1). The structure of RA95.5-5 in complex with inhibitor4, solved at 1.3 A resolution, showed further modulation of the L1, L6 and L7 loops. In addition, this variant is modified exclusively at Lys83 (Fig. 3c), implying that the new catalytic pocket was more evolvable than the original computationally designed site. Site-directed mutagenesis confirmed that Lys83 is the key catalytic residue (Supplementary Table 2). When it was substituted by methionine, activity decreased greater than 200-fold. In contrast, the K210M mutation had no effect on catalytic efficiency. Introduction of the S110N mutation, which provided a 5-fold boost in activity in the first round of directed evolution of RA95.5, was probably decisive in favoring this particular evolutionary trajectory. The asparagine side chain is only 3.8 A away from the epsilon-amino group of Lys83 and may assist formation and breakdown of the initial carbinolamine intermediate through H-bonding interactions. A reduction in conformational heterogeneity may have further enhanced the activity of the new catalytic site. In fact, only a single rotamer was detected for the Lys83 side chain (Supplementary Fig. 4), due to reorientation of Tyr51 in response to the E53T mutation (Fig. 3b and 3c). Although two roughly perpendicular orientations of the naphthyl moiety were still observed (Supplementary Fig. 4), one is populated to a greater extent than the other (70:30). The preferred binding mode is bolstered by more extensive hydrophobic interactions, including pi-stacking of the naphthyl ring with the side chain of Phe184 (Fig. 3c). Additional mutagenesis and screening showed that the RA95.5-5 scaffold still possesses considerable evolutionary potential. The best clone from the eighth round of directed evolution, RA95.5-8, contains three additional active site mutations (K135N, S178V, G212D) and two more distant substitutions (S43R, F72Y). This variant is a remarkably effective retro-aldolase with a greater than 3 * 108-fold rate acceleration relative to free lysine in solution (Table 1), conversion of greater than 103substrate molecules per active site, and improved (14:1) enantioselectivity towards (R)-methodol (Supplementary Table 1). To place these results into context, RA95.5-8 has a 14-fold higher turnover number than the commercially available aldolase antibody 38C2 (Table 1), one of the most efficient artificial enzymes in the literatureNone. Moreover, the efficiency of the evolved retro-aldolase approaches that of human fructose-1,6-diphosphate (FDP) aldolase, a central enzyme in glucose metabolism. Thekcatandkcat/Kmvalues for cleavage of (R)-methodol (Supplementary Table 1) and FDPNoneby the two enzymes differ by less than factors of 2 (0.36 vs. 0.61 s-1) and 170 (1.6 * 103vs. 2.7 * 105M-1s-1), respectively. Though more efficient natural catalysts are known, this level of activity is notable for an artificial enzyme. Although computation does not yet deliver true enzyme-like activities, in silico design combined with laboratory evolution has afforded a remarkably efficient catalyst for a complex, multistep retro-aldol reaction. Notably, improvements in RA95 were manifest primarily in increasedkcatvalues, implying substantial fine-tuning of active site chemistry and not simply increased substrate affinity. Characterizing the increasingly active retro-aldolases, as opposed to working backward from an already optimized natural enzyme, has provided direct insight into the molecular events responsible for enhanced efficiency. For RA95, optimization entailed unexpectedly extensive structural and mechanistic remodeling (Fig. 4a). In this instance, the shift from low to high activity arose via serendipitous emergence of a mechanistically promiscuous intermediate containing a new catalytic lysine and an alternative substrate binding pocket. The dramatic changes observed during RA95 evolution naturally prompt the question whether generation of a highly active retro-aldolase required a computational design step. Although productive evolutionary trajectories might have been initiated from random libraries, recent experiments with the same scaffold demonstrate that chemical instruction conferred by computation greatly increases the probability of identifying catalystsNone. While the programmed mechanisms of other computationally designed enzymes have been generally reinforced and refined by directed evolutionNone,None, the molecular acrobatics observed with RA95 attest to the functional leaps that unanticipated, innovative mutations - here, replacement of Thr83 by lysine - can initiate. The remarkable transformation of RA95 was no doubt aided by the simplicity of the original design model. Although RA95.0 functions largely as intended, utilizing Lys210 for amine catalysis and an apolar pocket for substrate binding, it is much less sophisticated than natural aldolasesNone. The absence of supporting functional groups in the vicinity of the catalytic lysine, for instance, account for its comparatively low activity. Introduction of Tyr51 and Asn110 proximal to Lys83 probably facilitated the catalytic residue switch as the polar side chains of these residues can mediate critical proton transfers during catalysis, either directly or via bound water molecules. Extensive remodeling of active site loops observed in the course of RA95 evolution (Fig. 4b) is reminiscent of the structural changes that occur in antibody proteins during affinity maturation as a result of somatic mutationNone,None. As the new and ultimately superior substrate binding pocket was not apparent in the original design, conformational plasticity was undoubtedly crucial for the emergence and improvement of the new catalytic center. Indeed, the RosettaMatch searches in the original protein design calculations did not identify the more potent active site with a lysine nucleophile at position 83, indicating that the original scaffold backbone was not compatible with the theozymes (ideal active site geometries) used in the calculations. Changes in the loops may also have facilitated dynamic fluctuations allowing the active site to adapt to structurally distinct species on the multistep reaction pathNone. Additional research will be needed to determine the factors that make some designed sites more evolvable than others. Nevertheless, increasing starting design accuracy and activity would be advantageous for generating better leads for laboratory evolution and for improving control over specific evolutionary trajectories. Our results suggest two approaches for achieving these goals. The initial design calculations were carried out assuming a rigid scaffold, which is clearly incorrect. Proper sampling of plausible loop conformations and better control of loop structure through specific designed sequences should significantly improve placement of the idealized active site within the target scaffold; considering backbone flexibility in the design cycle would also enable wider-ranging exploration of potential sites for introducing catalytic residues. A second important lesson from our study is that more sophisticated arrays of functional groups than those in our starting retroaldolase will be crucial to accessing higher activities. To that end, more complex theozymes can be employed as design templates, but accurate modeling of long-range electrostatics and inclusion of explicit water molecules in the calculations will also be necessary to fine-tune the reactivity of these groupsNone. Although advances in these and other directions can be anticipated, the challenges of handling multiple transition states along a reaction coordinate make it likely that laboratory evolution will remain an essential tool for tailoring the properties of computationally designed aldolases for the foreseeable future. Conformational and functional promiscuity are believed to foster the evolution of enzyme functionNone. Structural snapshots of the evolving aldolase active site studied here support this view and provide a mechanistic description of the role catalytically ambiguous intermediates might play in such a process. Loop mobility and active site remodeling may have analogously shaped the evolution of many natural enzymesNone. Retro-aldolase RA95.0 was designed into the indole-3-glycerol phosphate synthase scaffold (PDB ID: 1LBL) using the RosettaMatchNoneand RosettaDesignNoneprograms, as previously describedNone,None. In addition to 11 active site mutations (E51V, K53E, L83T, K110S, E159L, N180M, L184F, L187G, E210K, S211L, G233S), it contains five surface substitutions (K10E, F22V, S70A, F246L, and L248E) that enhance protein production. The active site was subsequently optimized by iterative cassette mutagenesis of active site residues; six mutations that individually increased activity (V51Y, E53S, T83K, M180F, R182M, and D183N) were combined to give variant RA95.5None. This catalyst served as the starting point for multiple rounds of whole-gene random mutagenesis and screening. The gene encoding RA95.5 was subcloned into the commercial pET-29b(+) vector (Novagen). Primers for library cloning (forward primer: 5'-TGA TAA CAT ATG CCG CGT TAT CTG AAA GG and reverse primer: 5'-TTA TCA CTC GAG TGA TCC CTC GAT TAA TTC TTT) were purchased from Microsynth AG (Balgach, Switzerland). A DNA library was constructed by error-prone PCR (epPCR) using the GenemorphTM PCR mutagenesis kit (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) as recommended by the manufacturerNone. A low mutation rate was chosen to achieve one to two amino acid substitutions on average per protein. The linear epPCR library fragments and the pET-29b(+) vector containing a stuffer fragment were digested usingNdeI andXhoI endonucleases (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA, USA), gel purified, and subsequently ligated using T4 DNA ligase (New England Biolabs). The resulting plasmid library was purified by phenol/chloroform extraction and used to transformEscherichia coliBL21 Gold(DE3) cells (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). The transformation mixture was plated on Luria broth (LB) agar containing 30 ug mL-1kanamycin. Library quality and mutation rate were assessed by sequence analysis of plasmids from single colonies before screening (see below). The most active clone from the first round of mutagenesis and screening, RA95.5-S110N, served as the template for a second round of diversification by epPCR. In all subsequent rounds (three to eight), plasmids from the most active clones emerging from the previous round, typically 0.4% to 1% of the screened population, were isolated, pooled, and further diversified by a combination of epPCR and DNA shufflingNone. Specifically, following epPCR, the gene pool was digested using 60 ug mL-1bovine pancreatic DNase I (Roche, Basel, Switzerland) to give 50-100 bp fragments, which were gel-purified and re-assembled in a standard PCR reaction using the cloning primers. The full-length DNA library genes were digested and ligated into the pET-29b(+) vector, as described above. For the eighth mutagenesis round, two clones from a focused library that targeted position 178 (S178T and S178V) in RA95.5 were mixed with the seven best clones from the seventh round, and the resulting pool was diversified by epPCR and shuffled as already described. Based on their proximity to the new catalytic site, residues 57, 89, 110, and 178 in RA95.5-5 were individually targeted for a round of cassette mutagenesis. The DNA libraries were constructed by standard overlap extension PCRNoneusing the following degenerate primer pairs: RA95.5-5bs-P57f (5'-ATC GCG TAT TAT ACA CGC AAA TCGNNSTCA GGT CTG GAT GTT GAG CGT G) and RA95.5-5bs-P57r (5'-CGA TTT GCG TGT ATA ATA CGC GAT); RA95.5-5bs-F89f (5'-TT GGC CTG TCT ATT AAG ACA GAA GAG AAA TACNDTAAT GGC AGC TAT GAA ATG CTG C) and RA95.5-5bs-F89r (5'-GTA TTT CTC TTC TGT CTT AAT AGA CAG GCC AA); RA95.5-5bs-N110f (5'-GCT AGC AGT GTC AGT ATT CCA ATT CTA ATGNDTGAT TTT ATC GTG AAA GAA AGC CAG ATT G) and RA95.5-5bs-N110r (5'-CAT TAG AAT TGG AAT ACT GAC ACT GCT AGC); and RA95.5-5bs-S178f (5'-CGT ATC GGT GCG CGT TTT ATTNNSATC TTC TCA ATG AAT TTT GAA ACG GG) and RA95.5-5bs-S178r (5'-AAT AAA ACG CGC ACC GAT ACG). The randomized codons are shown in bold, where N is an equimolar mixture of all four nucleotides; D is an equimolar mixture of A, G, and T; and S is an equimolar mixture of G and C. The two most active variants isolated from these libraries, RA95.5-5-S178T and RA95.5-5-S178V, were included in the construction of the eighth round library as noted above. The role of selected active site residues was assessed by site-directed mutagenesis. The glutamate at position 53 in RA95.0, which was designed to coordinate a catalytic water molecule, was mutated to alanine (forward primer 5'-ACA GCA ATC ATC GCG GTT TAT GCG CGC AAA TCG CCG TCA GG and reverse primer 5'-CAT AAA CCG CGA TGA TTG CTG T). The lysines at positions 210 (RA95.0, RA95.5, and RA95.5-5) and 83 (RA95.5 and RA95.5-5) were individually replaced by methionine (K210, forward primer 5'-CGT GGT GAA AGT CGC GAT GCT GGG CAT TAG TGA GCG and reverse primer 5'-CGC GAC TTT CAC CAC G; and K83, forward primer 5'-TTA CGC GGT TGG CCT GTC TAT TAT GAC AGA AGA GA ATA CTT TAA TGG CAG CTA TG and reverse primer 5'-TAA TAG ACA GGC CAA CCG CGT AA). In addition, for RA95.5 and RA95.5-5, K83M/K210M double knock-outs were generated. To assess the influence of lysine at position 83 in the starting scaffold, an additional mutation T83K was inserted into the RA95.0-K210M mutant (T83, forward primer 5'-GCG GTT GGC CTG TCT ATT AAA ACA GAA GAA AAA TAC and reverse primer 5'-AAT AGA CAG GCC AAC CGC). Full-length genes were assembled using the standard library cloning primers. Ligation into the pET-29b(+)-library vector and subsequent transformation was performed as described above. Approximately 800 clones were screened per evolutionary round as previously describedNone. Single colony transformants were grown in LB medium containing 30 ug mL-1kanamycin overnight in 96-well microtiter plates at 25 degrees C. These pre-cultures were used to inoculate 1 mL LB medium containing 30 ug mL-1kanamycin (rounds one to six) in 2 mL 96-deep-well plates. The cell culture volume for protein production was reduced to 0.5 ml in the seventh round and to 0.3 mL in the eighth round. After 4 h at 37 degrees C (OD600? 0.4) gene expression from the T7 promoter was induced with 0.1 mM isopropyl-beta-d-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG) and the cultures were further incubated for 5 h. Cells were then harvested and stored at -20 degrees C prior to lysis. Cell lysis was accomplished by addition of 300 uL lysis buffer (25 mM HEPES, 100 mM NaCl, pH 7.5, containing 1 mg mL-1egg white lysozyme, Sigma) and subsequent incubation of the resuspended cells at 23 degrees C for one hour. The lysates were cleared by centrifugation and the supernatants transferred to black fluorescence microtiter plates (FluoroNunc, Nunc, Penfield, NY, USA). The substrate, (+/-)-methodol, was added and its conversion to 6-methoxy-2-naphthaldehyde and acetone was monitored in a Varioskan flush multimode reader (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) (excitation wavelength, 330 nm; emission wavelength, 452 nm; excitation band width, 12 nm) at 29 degrees C. The substrate concentration was either 80 uM (first round) or 30 uM (all other libraries). The most active clone from the preceding round was included on each plate in triplicate as a positive control and reference. The clones with the largest increase in activity relative to the standard, typically up to 1% of the total population, were picked from the replica plate for plasmid isolation, sequencing, and further diversification. For detailed characterization, the best variant in each round was identified and characterized as described below. Individual variants were produced as C-terminally His-tagged proteins inE. coliBL21 Gold(DE3) and purified by affinity chromatography for biochemical characterizationNone,None. To ensure monoclonality, single-colony streakouts of the most active clones were prepared from the library master plates. Single colonies were used to prepare pre-cultures, of which 0.5 mL were inoculated in 500 mL of LB medium containing 30 ug mL-1kanamycin. The bacterial cultures were incubated at 37 degrees C and 220 rpm until an OD600of 0.4 was reached. Following induction of enzyme production with 0.1 mM IPTG, the cells were incubated for an additional 5 h at 37 degrees C, at which point they were harvested. Cell pellets were stored at -20 degrees C prior to lysis. Upon thawing, the pellets were resuspended in 25 mM HEPES, 300 mM NaCl, pH 7.5, containing 1 mg mL-1egg white lysozyme and incubated for 1 h at 4 degrees C. The cells were then lysed by sonication, and cell debris was removed by centrifugation. Ni-NTA beads (Qiagen, Venlo, Netherlands) were equilibrated with 25 mM HEPES, 300 mM NaCl, pH 7.5, and the soluble protein fraction was loaded onto the column. The samples were washed once with the same buffer without imidazole and subsequently with buffer containing 20 mM and 40 mM imidazole. The protein was finally eluted using 200 mM imidazole. The sample was dialyzed at 4 degrees C against 25 mM HEPES, 100 mM NaCl, pH 7.5. Protein concentration was determined from the absorbance at 280 nm using calculated extinction coefficients (http://expasy.org/tools/protparam.html). The solubility of (+/-)-methodol in aqueous buffer (25 mM HEPES, 100 mM NaCl, pH 7.5, containing 2.7% acetonitrile) was assessed by UV/Vis spectroscopy. Based on the experimentally determined extinction coefficient of 1,390 +/- 10 M-1cm-1at 330 nm, racemic methodol is fully soluble in this buffer up to a concentration of 1000 uM at 29 degrees C. In contrast, the solubility of the retro-aldol product, 6-methoxy-2-naphthaldehyde (epsilon310= 16,100 +/- 370 M-1cm-1) is much lower under these conditions. Because deviations from Beer's law were observed above 50 uM 6-methoxy-2-naphthaldehyde, initial rates were only calculated from data in which no more than 25 uM product had accumulated. Kinetic assays were carried out at 29 degrees C in aqueous buffer (25 mM HEPES, 100 mM NaCl, pH 7.5) in 2 mm cuvettes. Acetonitrile at a final concentration of 2.7% was used as co-solvent to facilitate substrate solubility. Initial rates for the conversion of methodol to the fluorescent product 6-methoxy-2-naphthaldehyde were determined in a Photon Technology International spectrofluorometer (excitation wavelength, 330 nm; emission wavelength, 452 nm; band width, 2 nm) using a predetermined standard curve to convert fluorescence units into concentrations of product. The data were corrected for the buffer-catalyzed background reaction measured under the same conditions. Although the fluorescence assay is highly sensitive, photobleaching and side reactions of the photoactive species lead to complicationsNone,None. Consequently, this assay was primarily used for preliminary characterization or for comparative purposes. In general, steady-state kinetic parameters were determined with the more robust UV-vis assay. Reactions were carried out at 29 degrees C in aqueous buffer (25 mM HEPES, 100 mM NaCl, pH 7.5) in 1 mL sealed quartz cuvettes using either an RA95 variant or the catalytic antibody 38C2 (Sigma-Aldrich) as catalyst. Acetonitrile at a final concentration of 2.7% was included as co-solvent to facilitate substrate solubility. The retro-aldol cleavage of methodol to give 6-methoxy-2-naphthaldehyde and acetone was monitored spectroscopically at 350 nm (Deltaepsilon = 5,970 M-1cm-1) using a Perkin Elmer Lambda 35 UV-vis spectrometer equipped with a Peltier system for temperature control. The data were corrected for the buffer-catalyzed background reaction measured under the same conditions. Steady-state kinetic parameters were derived by fitting the experimental data to the Michaelis-Menten equation:v0/[E] =kcat. [S] / (KM+ [S]), wherev0is the initial rate, [E] is the enzyme concentration, and [S] is the substrate concentration. The pHdependence was determined under sub-saturating conditions ([S] less than one-fifth ofKM) using the buffers: 25 mM MES, 100 mM NaCl from pH5.2 to 6; 25 mM HEPES, 100 mM NaCl from pH7 to 8.5, and 25 mM AMP, 100 mM NaCl above pH8.5. Data were fitted to the following equation: (kcat/KM)obs= (kcat/KM)max/ (1 + 10pNone- pNone). The RA95 retro-aldolases were mixed with the 1-(6-methoxy-2-naphthalenyl)-1,3-butanedione (4) in a 1:50 to 1:100 molar ratio and incubated at 400 rpm overnight (RA95.5 and RA95.5-5) or for 3 days (RA95.0) at 30 degrees C. After incubation, the sample was concentrated to 10-20 mg mL-1and purified by size-exclusion chromatography (S75 16/60, GE Healthcare). Peak fractions were analyzed by SDS-PAGE and pure fractions were pooled. The samples were concentrated to approximately 12 mg mL-1using a 10 kDa molecular weight cutoff ultrafiltration membrane (Amicon, Millipore) and crystallized by the vapor diffusion method. Initial crystallization hits were obtained by using commercial sparse matrix screens PEG/Ion (Hampton Research) and PACT Premiere (Molecular Dimension). Successful crystallization conditions were improved by increasing the incubation temperature from 20 degrees C to 28 degrees C and by varying the pH, precipitant concentration and additives around the initial hits. In the case of RA95.5-5, microseeding afforded larger crystals. The optimized crystallization conditions were 0.2 M D,L-malic acid, pH 7.0, and 20% w/v PEG 3350 for RA95.0; 0.1 M HEPES-KOH, pH 7.6, containing 23% w/v PEG 3350 for RA95.5; and 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.5, 0.1 M Na2HPO4and 23% w/v PEG 3350 for RA95.5-5. Crystals were cryoprotected by plunging into mother liquor complemented with 20% w/v glycerol prior to flash freezing in liquid nitrogen. Crystallographic data were collected at 100 K using a wavelength of 1.00 A at the Swiss Light Source (SLS) X06SA PX beamline (Paul Scherrer Institute, Villigen, Switzerland). The diffraction data obtained were indexed and integrated with the program XDSNone. All structures were solved by molecular replacement using the program PHASERNonewith the deposited structure 1LBLNoneas a starting model. The model was refined by using PHENIXNoneand the obtained model was subsequently optimized by iterative model building with the program COOTNone. Resolution estimation and data truncation were performed by using an I/sigma(I) criterion of 2 for the highest resolution shell. Additionally, we used a split half correlation CC(1/2) criterion of 50% to avoid discarding highly significant dataNone. The backbone dihedral angles for all three proteins were distributed within the most favored (92.9 to 95.6%) and additionally allowed regions (7.1 to 4.4%) of the Ramachandran map. Details of the refinement statistics are summarized inSupplementary Table 3. Racemic 4-hydroxy-4-(6-methoxy-2-naphthyl)-2-butanone, also referred to as (+/-)-methodol, was synthesized following a literature procedureNone. The individual (R) and (S) enantiomers were separated by preparative normal phase HPLC using a chiral silica sorbent column (Reprosil Chiral-NR, 8 um, 250 * 20 mm; Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) and 30% ethyl acetate in hexane at a flow rate of 20 mL min-1for elution. The fractions of the well-separated isomers (retention times: 8.5 and 10.9 min) were collected and the solvent removed on a rotary evaporator. 1H NMR spectra and [alpha]D22values were in agreement with the literatureNone. 100 mg 4-hydroxy-4-(6-methoxy-2-naphthyl)-2-butanone were incubated with 1.2 equivalents of Dess-Martin periodinane in chloroform for 1 hour at room temperatureNone. The oxidized product was purified by silica gel chromatography, eluting with hexanes/ethyl acetate. The identity of the compound was confirmed by matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization mass spectrometry ([M+H]+, 242.09 calculated and 242.09 measured); its1H-NMR spectrum was identical to that reported in the literatureNone. Protein Data Bank: the crystal structures of RA95.0, RA95.5, and RA95.5-5 have been deposited under the accession numbers 4a29, 4a2s, and 4a2r, respectively.