The human papillomavirus (HPV) is responsible for approximately 18,000 cancers among females and 8000 cancers among males per year in the United States[1]. HPV vaccination has the potential to prevent the majority of HPV-related cancers and genital warts. While the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices recommends that males and females receive routine HPV vaccination beginning at 11 or 12 years of age[2], recent estimates from the National Immunization Survey - Teen of the receipt of greater than =1 dose were 60.0% in adolescent females and 41.7% in adolescent males[3]. Thus far, interventions aiming to increase HPV vaccination, have had limited success, with mixed results found in two recent reviews[4],[5]. Studies have identified differences in barriers to HPV vaccination of sons compared to daughters, including differences in provider recommendation, concerns about safety, and parents not knowing that boys could get the vaccine[6]. Though studies have examined within-family differences in HPV vaccination intention by children?s sex[7], no studies have reported on within-family differences in HPV-related beliefs by children?s sex. The aim of this study was to examine within-family differences by children?s sex in HPV vaccine uptake and HPV-related beliefs. Between September 2011 and October 2013, women with greater than =1 child aged 9-17 years were identified through review of the daily census and approached at four reproductive health clinics operated by the University of Texas Medical Branch (UTMB) to participate in a survey on HPV vaccination. Eligible participants were invited to complete a self-administered survey, available in either English or Spanish, and were reimbursed $5 for their time and effort. The UTMB Institutional Review Board approved this study. Of the 1436 women who met eligibility criteria, 1392 (97%) participated and 44 (3%) declined[8]. A subset of the original study, mothers who had both a son and a daughter 9-17 years old (n=350), were included in these analyses. Participants responded to questions regarding the HPV vaccine separately for their oldest daughter and oldest son in the 9-17 years age range. Mothers were asked whether their daughter/son had completed the HPV vaccine series, had started (but not completed) the series, had scheduled an appointment to receive it, or had not received any doses. Dichotomous variables were created for initiation ( greater than =1 dose received) and completion ( greater than =3 doses) of the vaccine series. Mothers stated their agreement with statements about their beliefs beginning with, "If my daughter/son gets HPV," and ending with, "it could harm her/his future health," "it could harm her/his future relationship with her/his partner," and, "I will be devastated." Response options were dichotomized with those who reported they strongly disagreed, disagreed, or were neutral versus those who reported they agreed or strongly agreed. Mothers also responded to the following question on a 0-100% Likert scale with eleven points, "If your 9-17 year old daughter/son does NOT get Gardasil, what are the chances that she/he will contract HPV?" A similar question was asked about their child developing genital warts. Response options were dichotomized with those reporting 0% versus greater than 0%. Mothers also were queried, "I want my daughter/son vaccinated against the human papillomavirus (HPV) within the next year," and, "I feel confident that I could get Gardasil for my daughter/son." Response options were dichotomized with those who reported they strongly disagreed, disagreed, or were neutral versus those who reported they agreed or strongly agreed, while mothers with one or both children having completed the vaccine series were excluded from analysis. McNemar?s chi-squared tests for paired samples were used to examine marginal homogeneity across children?s sex in maternal beliefs and children?s HPV vaccination uptake. Statistical significance was assessed at thealpha=0.05 level. All analyses were performed using Stata Version 14.0[9]. A total of 350 mothers indicated they had both a daughter and a son between 9-17 years of age. Most mothers were between 30 and 39 years of age, Hispanic, and married or cohabitating (Table 1). Mothers were more likely to report their daughters compared to sons had initiated the series and completed it, but overall vaccination was low, with 72.3% reporting no HPV vaccination for either child (Table 2). There were no differences by children?s sex in mothers? beliefs about HPV, perceived risk of their children contracting HPV, or perceived risk of their children developing genital warts. NoneNoneNoneNoneNoneNoneNoneNoneNoneNoneDemographic characteristics of families with both a son and a daughter 9-17 years old (n=350). Child HPV vaccination uptake and maternal beliefs about HPV in families with both a son and a daughter 9-17 years old (n=350). p-values calculated using McNemar?s chi-squared test for paired samples. Mothers who answered questions about at least one child who had completed the HPV vaccine series were excluded from these analyses (n=73 excluded). Among those who had not yet completely vaccinated either child (n=277), mothers were more likely to report they wanted their daughters compared to sons vaccinated in the next year (Table 2). Mothers were also more likely to report feeling confident they could get their daughters vaccinated than their sons. In this population, HPV vaccine uptake differed by children?s sex, but maternal beliefs about HPV by children?s sex were similar. These results suggest beliefs may not be driving sex differences in HPV vaccination. Mothers were more likely to report they wanted their daughters vaccinated than their sons and were more likely to report feeling confident they could get their daughters vaccinated, despite similar perceptions of risk. Since some physicians report a preference to vaccinate girls[10], associations between confidence in getting children vaccinated by sex and provider recommendation should be further explored. This study has several strengths and limitations. While a strength of this study was the inclusion of a diverse, low-income population, the small sample size limited our ability to conduct multivariate analyses. We focused on views and behaviors that differ by children?s sex within a family, essentially controlling for maternal characteristics, though reliance on maternal report of children?s HPV vaccination is subject to recall bias. The survey used in this study had not been validated. Mothers did not report different perceptions about how HPV would impact their sons compared to daughters, yet were less likely to vaccinate sons. This may lead to male adolescents being exposed to vaccine-preventable strains of HPV prior to initiating the series. Future interventions should address the disparity in uptake by ensuring parents receive both adequate information about HPV vaccination and equal access to the vaccine for their sons and daughters. This work reflects the opinions of the authors and does not represent the opinions or influences of the National Institutes of Health. The authors declare that there are no conflicts of interest.