Thioredoxins are small regulatory proteins containing redox-active cysteines. In the reduced state, thioredoxins control the function of cellular target proteins by reducing disulphide bridges in the redox-active sites of proteins. Subsequently, the oxidized thioredoxins are reduced by thioredoxin reductases, thereby constituting a thioredoxin system. Plants contain a particularly large number of thioredoxin isoforms in several cellular compartments, including the cytosol, nucleus, mitochondria, and chloroplasts (reviewed byMeyerNone, 2008). Unlike other cell organelles, chloroplasts have two different systems to reduce thioredoxins. Ferredoxin-thioredoxin reductase links thioredoxins and light-dependent redox-active chloroplast proteins (reviewed bySchurmann and Buchanan, 2008). Ferredoxin-thioredoxin reductase is localized exclusively to plastids, while the isoforms of the NADPH-dependent thioredoxin reductase (NTR) are found in three cellular compartments. InArabidopsis thaliana, the NTRA and NTRB enzymes are localized both to the cytosol and mitochondria (ReichheldNone, 2007), while the NTRC isoform is found exclusively in plastids (SerratoNone, 2004;KirchsteigerNone, 2012). NTRC is a unique enzyme comprising both NTR and thioredoxin sequences within the polypeptide (SerratoNone, 2004). As NADPH can also be produced during the dark period by the pentose phosphate pathway (Neuhaus and Emes, 2000), it has been suggested that the NTRC-dependent thioredoxin system plays an important role in chloroplasts during the night or under low light, when the level of reduced ferredoxin is low (Perez-RuizNone, 2006). Photosynthetic carbon assimilation provides plants with energy and carbon skeletons for metabolism. In general, low light intensity, short photoperiods, and low CO2concentration decrease the vegetative growth of plants (Walters and Horton, 1995;MattNone, 2001;GibonNone, 2009). In the course of the photoperiod, sucrose is formed from the triose phosphates derived from the Calvin cycle and transported to the roots, developing leaves, and flowers that form sinks for photosynthates. In light, assimilated carbon is also transitorily stored in mesophyll chloroplasts as starch that is mobilized by degradation during the following night, providing plants with carbohydrates to support respiration and growth (recent reviews byZeemanNone, 2007,2010). The transitory formation of starch allows photosynthesis to continue in light, even after saturation of sucrose synthesis and transport. Starch turnover in leaf chloroplasts is critical for plant metabolism, and mutations affecting starch accumulation or remobilization result in a significant decrease in plant growth (CasparNone, 1985;SchulzeNone, 1991;ZeemanNone, 1998;ChiaNone, 2004;GibonNone, 2004;NiittylaNone, 2004). The correlation between starch metabolism and growth is complex (GibonNone, 2009;SulpiceNone, 2009). Metabolic profiling ofArabidopsisleaves acclimated to various photoperiods demonstrated that the starch degradation rate in the dark has the strongest correlation with relative growth rate ofArabidopsis(GibonNone, 2009), indicating that efficient starch remobilization directly promotes growth. Accordingly, long photoperiods with short nights decrease the synthesis rate in light and increase the degradation rate of starch in darkness, respectively (LuNone, 2005;GibonNone, 2009). The primary molecular mechanisms controlling starch turnover rate in short-day [SD, 8h light/16h dark (8L/16D)]- and long-day (LD, 16L/8D)-acclimated leaves remain unknown. Both the synthesis and degradation pathways comprise enzymes that are highly regulated by metabolite feedback control, reversible protein phosphorylation, and chloroplast redox state (ZeemanNone, 2007;KottingNone, 2010). ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase (AGPase) is the key enzyme in starch synthesis that controls the flux from carbon to starch (StittNone, 2010). It is redox activated in light by reduction of a disulphide bridge between the small subunits of the enzyme (BallicoraNone, 2000;HendriksNone, 2003). Also, the enzymes involved in starch degradation, glucan, water dikinase, phosphoglucan phosphatase (DSP4), and beta-amylase 1 have been shown to be under a redox control (MikkelsenNone, 2005;SokolovNone, 2006;SparlaNone, 2006). It has been shown previously that the growth of plants lacking NTRC is retarded particularly under short photoperiods (Perez-RuizNone, 2006;LepistoNone, 2009). NTRC has been shown to control the redox state of chloroplast 2-Cys peroxiredoxins (2-Cys Prxs) that contribute to elimination of H2O2in chloroplasts (Perez-RuizNone, 2006;StenbaekNone, 2008;KirchsteigerNone, 2009;PulidoNone, 2010). NTRC is also involved in the regulation of the enzymes in chlorophyll (StenbaekNone, 2008;RichterNone, 2013) and starch (MichalskaNone, 2009) synthesis. Furthermore, we have demonstrated that both wild-type chloroplasts and small plastids with poorly developed thylakoid membranes exist in a singleArabidopsis ntrcmesophyll cell (Lepisto and Rintamaki, 2012,LepistoNone, 2012). Due to the variety of reported effects of NTRC, we raised the question of whether the slowest growth rate observed in SD-grown knockoutntrcplants primarily arises from defects in chloroplast biogenesis or increased reactive oxygen species (ROS) production, or whether the imbalance of the starch metabolism in chloroplasts impairs the biomass production in the absence of NTRC. We have shown recently that poorly developed chloroplasts are present inntrclines independently of the photoperiod (LepistoNone, 2012) and that chlorophyll biosynthesis was reduced equally in plants acclimated to SD and LD conditions (RichterNone, 2013). Thus, the reduced growth ofntrclines also observed in plants acclimated to LD conditions or to continuous light (Perez-RuizNone, 2006;LepistoNone, 2009) is most likely due to the defects in chloroplast biogenesis in the absence of NTRC. Here, we report that acclimation ofntrclines to photoperiods with nights longer than 14h induced extra attenuation ofntrcplant growth. The detrimental effect of long nights on growth ofntrcplants was not primarily due to the rise in oxidative stress in chloroplasts but rather to retarded synthesis of starch inntrcleaves. We also report that the acclimation ofA. thalianaCol-0 andntrcto the photoperiods with long nights increased the capacity of light-dependent ROS production in chloroplasts that was not counterbalanced by the activation of antioxidant systems. We propose that thioredoxin-dependent redox control of starch synthesis is crucial for plants with a slow growth rate (e.g. SD-acclimated plants), in which photosynthates are largely allocated to starch during the light period. Wild-typeA. thalianaecotype Columbia (Col-0) and T-DNA insertion mutant (http://signal.salk.edu/;AlonsoNone, 2003) of NTRC (At2g41680; SALK_096776,LepistoNone, 2009) plants were grown on a mixture of soil and vermiculite (1:1) under 130 mumol of photons m-2s-1at 20 degrees C under light/dark (L/D) periods as indicated in the figures and tables. The age of the plants in each experiment is indicated separately in the results. Five rosettes of Col-0 andntrcplants grown under each L/D period were excised and dried at 60 degrees C for 24h and weighed. Statistical analysis of the data was performed by one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with Tukey's HSD (P less than 0.05). Leaves (100mg) were frozen in liquid nitrogen. Soluble sugars were extracted three times at 80 degrees C for 20min each. The first extraction was done with 400 mul of 96% (v/v) ethanol:2mM HEPES (pH 7.5) at a ratio of 4:1, the second extraction with 400 mul of 96% (v/v) ethanol:2mM HEPES (pH 7.5) at 1:1, and the third extraction with 200 mul of 96% (v/v) ethanol:2mM HEPES (pH 7.5) at 4:1. Supernatants were collected after each extraction and combined to measure soluble sugars. Sucrose,d-fructose andd-glucose were measured by spectrophotometry with a Sucrose/Fructose/d-Glucose Test kit (Megazyme). For measurement of starch content, the remaining leaf material was dried and ground in liquid nitrogen. Starch was enzymatically hydrolysed to glucose using a Total Starch Test kit (Megazyme) and the starch content was measured by spectrophotometry using the kit and expressed as glucose units per leaf fresh weight (FW). Isolation of thylakoid membranes and total and soluble leaf proteins was performed using the methods described byLepistoNone(2009). Total leaf protein extracts and soluble protein extracts corresponding to 5-15 mug of protein were solubilized and separated by SDS-PAGE (Laemmli, 1970), using 15% (w/v) acrylamide and 6M urea in the separation gel, and subsequently electroblotted onto a PVDF membrane (Millipore). After blocking with 1% (w/v) BSA (fatty acid free; Sigma-Aldrich), the polypeptides were immunodetected with protein-specific antibodies using a PhototopeTM-Star Detection kit (New England Biolabs). Protein-specific antibodies were purchased from Agrisera (GPX and SOD) and Innovagen (APX;KangasjarviNone, 2008) and kindly provided by Professor K.-J. Dietz from the Department for Biochemistry and Physiology of Plants, Bielefeld University, Germany (2-Cys Prx, PrxIIE and PrxQ). The analysis was repeated three times and representative Western blots are presented inFig. 4. Accumulation of H2O2and superoxide (O2?-) in the leaves was detected using diaminobenzidine (DAB; Sigma-Aldrich) and nitroblue tetrazolium (NBT; Sigma-Aldrich) substrates, respectively. Four rosettes were excised at the end of the light period and incubated on Petri dishes containing a 0.1mg ml-1solution of DAB (pH 3.8) or a 5mg ml-1solution of NBT overnight in the dark. The next morning, the dishes were transferred to growth light (130 mumol of photons m-2s-1at 20 degrees C) for 1h and thereafter the rosettes were incubated in 96% (v/v) ethanol until the chlorophyll was bleached, or the rosettes were incubated in ethanol directly after the dark period without light treatment. Finally, the most representative stained rosettes were photographed. An Amplex Red Hydrogen Peroxide/Peroxidase Assay kit (Invitrogen) was used to measure H2O2production in 4-week-old (SD) and in 3-week-old (LD) plants. Leaves were frozen and ground in liquid nitrogen. A volume of 200 mul of phosphate buffer (20mM K2HPO4, pH 6.5) was added to 30mg of leaf powder. After centrifugation, the supernatant was incubated with horseradish peroxidase and Amplex Red reagent according to the Amplex Red Hydrogen Peroxide/Peroxidase Assay kit instructions. The fluorescence was quantified using an Infinite 200 Pro microplate reader (Tecan) with excitation at 545nm and emission at 590nm. Statistical analysis of the data was performed by one-way ANOVA with Tukey's HSD (P less than 0.05). Spin trapping assays withN-(4-pyridylmethylene)-tert-butylamineN,N'-dioxide (4-POBN) were carried out using shocked chloroplasts at a concentration of 10 mug chloroplasts ml-1. Samples were illuminated for 1min with white light (1500 mumol of photons m-2s-1) in the presence of 50mM 4-POBN, 4% ethanol, 50 muM Fe-EDTA, and buffer (25mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 5mM MgCl2, 0.3M sorbitol). EPR spectra were recorded at room temperature in a standard quartz flat cell using an ESP-300 X-band (9.73 GHz) spectrometer (Bruker). The following parameters were used: microwave frequency, 9.73 GHz, modulation frequency, 100kHz, modulation amplitude, 1 G, microwave power, 6.3 mW, receiver gain, 2*104, time constant, 40.96ms; number of scans, 4. Thentrcand Col-0 plants were grown in continuous light and under various L/D regimes under natural 24h cycles (T24) or under L/D cycles different from 24h (T20, T28, and T32) to determine whether the lack of NTRC altered the circadian-clock-controlled growth ofArabidopsis(Fig. 1andSupplementary Fig. S1atJXBonline). Rosettes were harvested either at identical developmental stages of Col-0 plants (before the induction of inflorescence) (Table 1) or at a stage when the plants were exposed to light for equal hours (Supplementary Table S1atJXBonline). The altered clock period length of T20 or T28 did not significantly diminish the biomass production of Col-0 rosettes, whereas growth under the clock period length of T32 with 16L/16D reduced the biomass production by more than 50% (see the plants grown under T20, T24, T28, and T32 with a total light period of 264 or 276h inTable 1). The reduction in biomass production in thentrcline corresponded to the pattern detected with Col-0, except that the growth ofntrcplants was reduced further in plants acclimated to the T24 and T32 clock period with a long night of 16h. The percentage drop inntrcbiomass production in comparison with Col-0 plants was 43-76% in plants grown under photoperiods with nights of 14h or shorter and more than 90% in plants grown under photoperiods with16h dark periods (Table 1). This additional drop in biomass production ofntrcleaves grown under long nights was independent of total light exposure of the plants during growth, as evidenced by comparison of the biomass production of plants with total exposure to light for ~170h (16L/8D, 14L/14D, 12D/12D, and 8L/16D), or the plants with total illumination of ~270h (12L/12D, 14L/14D and 16L/16D) (Table 1andSupplementary Table S1). The large reduction inntrcdry weight under photoperiods with long dark periods indicated that the long nights were detrimental to plants in the absence of chloroplast NTRC. Rosette dry weights in Arabidopsis thaliana Col-0 andntrcgrown under various light-dark rhythms and harvested at an equal developmental stageRosette age (d) is the number of T24 cycles from germination to harvesting. Biomass data are means +/-standard error (n=5 in all experiments). For phenotype of plants, seeFig. 1. Statistically significant differences (ANOVA, Tukey's HSD;P less than 0.05) between biomasses under different L/Drhythms in each line are indicated with letters (a-d). DW, dry weight. Phenotypes ofA. thalianaCol-0 andntrcrosettes grown under various photoperiods. Bar, 2cm. NTRC provides electrons to chloroplast ROS detoxification systems, particularly to 2-Cys Prxs (Perez-RuizNone, 2006;StenbaekNone, 2008;KirchsteigerNone, 2009). It has been suggested that NTRC is a particularly critical mediator of reducing power in chloroplasts during the night, when the light-dependent anti-oxidant systems are unavailable (SpinolaNone, 2008). The measurement of H2O2content in a whole rosette demonstrated thatntrcleaves acclimated to SDs accumulated slightly higher amounts of H2O2both in dark-adapted and illuminated leaves than Col-0 rosettes, but the differences were not statistically significant (Supplementary Fig. S2atJXBonline). We further studied the accumulation of H2O2and O2?-in vivoin leaves that were exposed directly to light by staining the rosettes with DAB and NBT, respectively (Fig. 2). Illumination of the rosettes grown under a SD, LD, or 16L/16D rhythm for 1h after the dark period induced higher accumulation of H2O2in Col-0 andntrcrosettes acclimated to the L/D rhythms with long nights than in LD-acclimated leaves. The differences in the DAB staining intensity were highest in younger, photosynthetically active leaves, whereas the old rosette leaves of both SD- and LD-acclimated plants accumulated H2O2under illumination. Thentrcleaves did not accumulate higher amounts of H2O2when the DAB staining intensity was compared with the respective Col-0 plants. Staining of leaves with NBT demonstrated that no significant differences in staining intensities were observed between Col-0 andntrcleaves. Accumulation of ROS inA. thalianaCol-0 andntrcleaves grown under SD, LD, or 16L/16D photoperiods. (A) H2O2; (B) superoxide. Accumulation of H2O2and superoxide in plants was detected by DAB and NBT staining, respectively. Rosettes were excised at the end of the light period, and incubated in DAB or NBT solution in the dark overnight (16h for SD-grown plants and for plants grown under 16L/16D rhythm, and 8h for LD-grown plants). The next morning, staining was detected either directly (dark) or after 1h of treatment under growth light (GL; 130 mumol of photons m-2s-1). Typically stained rosettes are shown in the figure. Bars, 1cm. Measurement of the total H2O2content in rosette leaves did not reveal the origin of ROS in the plant cell. As NTRC is a plastid redox regulator and the photosynthetic electron transport chain is the main source of ROS in chloroplasts (Gill and Tuteja, 2010), the light-induced formation of ROS in isolated thylakoids was investigated by EPR spectroscopy using ethanol/4-POBN as the spin traps. Performing 4-POBN spin trapping in the presence of ethanol and Fe-EDTA is a procedure to demonstrate indirectly the formation of O2?-and H2O2via the detection of HO? through its secondary 4-POBN/alpha-hydroxyethyl spin adduct (MubarakshinaNone, 2010). In the absence of other electron acceptors, O2is reduced to O2?-at the acceptor side of photosystem I. O2?-disproportionates spontaneously or by superoxide dismutase (SOD) catalysis to H2O2, which generates HO? radicals in the presence of Fe(II) in the so-called Fenton reaction. Whereas no signal was observed when samples were maintained in the dark in the presence of ethanol/4-POBN, illumination of thylakoids resulted in strong EPR signals as sextets of lines (aN=15.61 G;aHbeta=2.55 G) characteristic of 4-POBN/alpha-hydroxyethyl aminoxyl. Representative spectra are shown inFig. 3. After 1min of illumination with 1500 mumol quanta m-2s-1of white light, thylakoids from Col-0 grown in SD conditions produced approximately 50% more ROS than those from Col-0 grown in LD conditions (Supplementary Table S2atJXBonline). Thylakoids fromntrcplants produced a signal that was of comparable size to the signal obtained in SD Col-0 plants independent of the light regime (Supplementary Table S2). Addition of 3-(3,4-dichlorophenyl)-1,1-dimethylurea (DCMU), an inhibitor of electron transfer in photosystem II, completely inhibited the spin adduct formation. Addition of dibromothymoquinone (DBMIB), an inhibitor of the cytochromeb6fcomplex, also inhibited the spin adduct formation. When the generation of singlet oxygen was measured using the spin trap 2,2,6,6-tetramethyl-4-piperidone (TEMPD), no significant difference between Col-0 andntrcwas observed, independent of the light regime (data not shown). Taken together, this showed that OH? radicals were generated by the reduction of O2to O2?-at the acceptor side of photosystem I and not by excitation of chlorophylls in disordered reaction centres or antenna systems. We concluded that the L/D rhythm with long nights raises a potential to generate ROS in chloroplasts. This increase, however, was not significantly higher in SD-grownntrcplants than in SD-Col-0 plants. Light-induced hydroxyl radical formation inA. thalianaCol-0 andntrcthylakoids. Generation of H2O2-derived hydroxyl radicals was shown by indirect spin trapping with 4-POBN/ethanol in the presence of Fe-EDTA. Typical spectra of the 4-POBN/alpha-hydroxyethyl adduct are shown. Samples were illuminated for 1min at high white light (1500 mumol of quanta m-2s-1). We next analysed whether the higher tendency to produce ROS in SD-acclimated chloroplasts altered the levels of antioxidant enzymes in chloroplasts. We estimated by immunodetection the relative amounts of a superoxide-detoxifying enzyme [chloroplastic Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase (SOD)] and H2O2-detoxifying enzymes; peroxiredoxins E and Q (PrxIIE and PrxQ), 2-Cys Prx A and B, glutathione peroxidase (GPX) and ascorbate peroxidases [thylakoid-bound ascorbate peroxidase (tAPX), stromal ascorbate peroxidase (sAPX), and cytoplasmic APX (cAPX)] in Col-0 andntrcplants grown under SD and LD photoperiods (Fig. 4). Neither knockout of NTRC nor the photoperiod induced substantial changes in the level of the cAPX. Acclimation to LD increased only the amount of PrxIIE in Col-0 plants. In comparison with Col-0, the amounts of SOD and sAPX were increased in both SD- and LD-grownntrcplants. No distinct differences in the amounts of PrxIIE, PrxQ, or GPX were detected in Col-0 andntrcgrown under SD conditions, whereas under LD conditions the amounts of these anti-oxidative proteins were decreased slightly inntrcin comparison with Col-0 plants. The amount of 2-Cys Prxs was decreased in both SD- and LD-grownntrcplants compared with Col-0 plants. For the amounts of tAPX, no distinct differences were observed. We concluded that, in spite of a higher capacity to produce ROS, growth ofArabidopsisunder SD conditions does not significantly upregulate the enzymatic components of ROS scavenging pathways in chloroplasts. Furthermore, knockout of NTRC reduces the amount of 2-Cys Prxs that is compensated for by an increase in the amount of water-water cycle enzymes inntrcchloroplasts. Steady-state levels of antioxidant enzymes inA. thalianaCol-0 andntrcleaves grown under SD and LD. Below each band, the relative amount of protein in each sample is indicated. SD-grown Col-0 was given a value of 100. Plants were illuminated for 4h under growth light (130 mumol of photons m-2s-1) before sampling. Three biological replicates were analysed by SDS-PAGE and typical blots are presented. It has been reported that the diurnal leaf growth rhythm follows the fluctuations in endogenous carbohydrate content (WieseNone, 2007). Compared with metabolites, the nocturnal degradation rate of starch inArabidopsisleaves shows the strongest correlation with the relative growth rate (GibonNone, 2009). Therefore, we next analysed the diurnal content of soluble sugars and starch in Col-0 andntrcleaves grown under SD and LD conditions. The samples for the analyses of soluble sugars were taken at three different time points during the course of 24h (Supplementary Fig. S3atJXBonline). Starch accumulation and degradation in SD- and LD-grown plants was followed from samples taken at several time points during the course of 24h (Fig. 5). Accumulation and degradation of starch inA. thalianaCol-0 andntrcunder SD (A) and LD (B). Open and filled bars below the graphs indicate light and dark periods, respectively. Numbers indicate the apparent rates of starch synthesis and degradation (mumol glucose g-1FW h-1) during distinct phases of the light and dark periods (SD: 0-4h, 4-8h, 8-13h; LD: 0-4h, 4-12h, 12-16h, 16-20h). Data are means +/-standard error,n=5 in all experiments. In Col-0 plants, sucrose accumulated at the same rate under both SD and LD photoperiods, the residual amounts after long dark period being lower under SD conditions (Supplementary Fig. S3). After the dark period, the sucrose content of the LDntrcleaves was equal to that of LD Col-0, but while it increased in the light period in LD Col-0 leaves, no net accumulation of sucrose occurred in the light period in LDntrcplants. This suggested that sucrose was either rapidly consumed or was transported from the LD-grownntrcleaves in light. In the light, the sucrose content of the SD-grownntrcleaves was low, being only 60% of the amount of SD Col-0 leaves after the dark period. In summary, sucrose content in leaves correlated with the growth capacity of plants, being highest in LD Col-0 plants and lowest in SDntrcplants. The content of fructose and glucose increased during the first 4h of the light period in Col-0 andntrcleaves but stayed rather stable or decreased until the end of the day. Both SD- and LD-grownntrcplants accumulated fewer hexoses when compared with Col-0 leaves (Supplementary Fig. S3). The amount of starch in SD-grown plants, both Col-0 andntrc, began to rise directly after the onset of the light, and the accumulation of starch was further accelerated towards the end of the light period (Fig. 5), indicating that starch is an important storage form of photosynthates in the course of the entire SD photoperiod. In contrast, no accumulation of starch occurred in LD-grown plants in the first 4h of the light period, and the synthesis accelerated significantly just at the end of the photoperiod (Fig. 5). Thentrcplants accumulated less starch than Col-0 plants, with a reduction of about 50% at the end of both photoperiods. The largest distinction in starch content between Col-0 andntrcplants was thatntrcplants were not able to accelerate starch formation like the wild-type plants throughout the photoperiod in SD-grown plants and in the last 4h of the photoperiod in LD-grown plants (Fig. 5). The approximate accumulation rate of starch in the last 4h of the photoperiod was 1.0 mumol h-1g-1FW in SD Col-0 plants and 2,3 mumol h-1g-1FW in LD Col-0 plants, respectively, whereas the approximate maximal rates were 0.6 and 0.7 mumol h-1g-1FW for SD- and LD-grownntrcleaves, respectively (Fig. 5). The low starch synthesis rate became especially critical for SD-grownntrcleaves because of the short photoperiod (Fig. 5). The LD-grownntrcplants were capable of accumulating as much starch in a 16h photoperiod as SD Col-0 plants in an 8h photoperiod. The reduced ability to synthesize starch could also be seen in electron micrographs ofntrcchloroplasts. In contrast to Col-0, no starch granules were present in chloroplasts of SD-grownntrcleaves illuminated for 1h (Supplementary Fig. S4atJXBonline). The initial rate of starch remobilization after transition of plants to the dark correlated with the amount of starch in leaves in the end of the photoperiod and was independent of the knockout of NTRC (Fig. 5andSupplementary Fig. S5atJXBonline). Because of the reduced amount of starch in the end of the photoperiod, only a minor amount of starch was left in SD-grownntrcleaves after 5h in the dark (Fig. 5). No significant differences betweenntrcand Col-0 plants were recorded in the amount of starch left in the leaves after the dark period. AGPase and DSP4 are crucial thioredoxin-regulated enzymes in the starch synthesis and degradation pathways, respectively (Neuhaus and Stitt, 1990;BallicoraNone, 2000;SokolovNone, 2006). Furthermore, NTRC has been shown to activate AGPase by inducing the monomerization of the small subunit of AGPase bothin vitroandin vivo(MichalskaNone, 2009). To analyse whether NTRC is capable of regulating both the synthesis and degradation pathways of starch, we tested the direct interaction of thioredoxin reductase and the thioredoxin domains of NTRC with the small subunit of AGPase (At5g48300) and DSP4 polypeptide by a yeast two-hybrid technique (VignolsNone, 2005) (Supplementary Table S3atJXBonline). In the test, the cDNA encoding the chloroplast 2-Cys PrxB was used as an additional positive control. The polypeptides of the small subunit of AGPase interacted with the thioredoxin domain of NTRC (Supplementary Fig. S6atJXBonline), but the interaction was weaker than with 2-Cys PrxB. No interaction between NTRC domains and DSP4 was detected in the yeast two-hybrid test. Characterization of knockout lines has indicated that photoperiodic conditions have an impact on the development of thentrcphenotype (Perez-RuizNone, 2006;LepistoNone, 2009). NTRC controls multiple processes in chloroplasts, including chlorophyll biosynthesis, ROS metabolism, and the biosynthetic pathways of starch and amino acids (Perez-RuizNone, 2006;StenbaekNone, 2008;LepistoNone, 2009;MichalskaNone, 2009;PulidoNone, 2010;Lepisto and Rintamaki, 2012). The molecular process(es) that drastically weaken growth of knockoutntrclines under a SD photoperiod, however, have remained elusive. As the length of the photoperiod influences both the vegetative growth and the timing of flowering inArabidopsis, comparison of biomass production between plants grown under different L/D cycles is difficult. Therefore, we aimed to measure the rosette biomass both at an equal developmental stage and at a stage when the plants had been exposed to light for an equal length of time. It has been reported that the growth ofArabidopsisunder shorter (T20) or longer (T28) L/D cycles than the standard T24 results in reduced vegetative yield (DoddNone, 2005;GrafNone, 2010). In our experiments, the L/D cycle of T28 slightly and the rhythm of T32 strongly reduced the biomass production. The reduction of Col-0 biomass production under extended day length did not depend on the total exposure time of plants to light before harvesting (Table 1andSupplementary Table S1). This supports the hypothesis that the lower productivity under altered T-cycles depends primarily on the functions controlled by the circadian clock rather than the duration of the photosynthetically active period (Graf and Smith, 2011). The growth ofntrcrosettes was reduced under all studied light regimes (Table 1), which is probably primarily due to impairment of chloroplast biogenesis in mutant lines (LepistoNone, 2012;RichterNone, 2013). The biomass production ofntrclines was equally diminished in natural and unnatural photoperiods, suggesting that the lack of NTRC does not alter the circadian-clock-controlled growth ofArabidopsis. The highest reduction in vegetative growth inntrclines was observed under L/D rhythms with nights longer than 14h (Table 1). This extra retardation ofntrcgrowth depended neither on the total number of hours plants were exposed to light during growth nor on the length of the daily light period. This suggests that NTRC-dependent redox regulation in chloroplasts becomes increasingly important under the L/D rhythms with uninterrupted long nights. It has been established that NTRC is a primary reductant for plastid 2-Cys Prxs that eliminate H2O2in chloroplasts (Perez-RuizNone, 2006;KirchsteigerNone, 2009;PulidoNone, 2010). Thus, imbalanced ROS metabolism may account for the reduced growth ofntrclines grown under long nights. However, neither SD- nor LD-grownntrcleaves accumulated significantly higher amounts of H2O2or superoxide in comparison with Col-0 leaves (Fig. 2), suggesting that oxidative stress is not a primary reason for the deteriorated growth of thentrcline. The amounts of 2-Cys Prxs were significantly decreased both in SD- and LD-grownntrcleaves, indicating chronic oxidation of 2-Cys Prxs pool in the absence of NTRC (Fig. 4) (PulidoNone, 2010). On the other hand, the levels of both chloroplast Cu/Zn-SOD and stromal APX were significantly elevated inntrcleaves. These results are in line with recent reports showing an increase in the activity of Cu/Zn-SOD and a higher pool size of ascorbate inntrcleaves compared with wild-type leaves (PulidoNone, 2010). Correspondingly, knockout of stromal and thylakoid APXs induced higher accumulation of 2-Cys Prxs (KangasjarviNone, 2008), indicating a close interlinkage between the ascorbate-based antioxidant and the NTRC/2-Cys Prx systems in the scavenging of chloroplast H2O2. We concluded that knockout of NTRC modulates ROS homeostasis inArabidopsisleaves, while the oxidative stress does not primarily account for the extra retardation of vegetative growth in thentrclines under the L/D rhythms with long nights. This conclusion is in accordance with the phenotype of the double-knockout mutant of chloroplast 2-Cys Prxs, which shows no visible differences in comparison with wild type (PulidoNone, 2010). ROS metabolism may, however, be indirectly linked to the retarded growth ofntrcplants under SD conditions. Thylakoids isolated from SD-grown leaves have a higher capacity to produce ROS than the thylakoids isolated from LD-grown leaves (Fig. 3andSupplementary Table S2) (Michelet and Krieger-Liszkay, 2011). This is consistent with the increased intensity in DAB staining of the photosynthetically active Col-0 leaves, which indicates higher accumulation of H2O2in illuminatedArabidopsisleaves acclimated to a photoperiod with long nights (Fig. 2). Accordingly, acclimation to SDs increases expression of H2O2marker genes as indication of the elevated steady-state content of H2O2(QuevalNone, 2007). However, a higher capacity to produce ROS in SD-grown chloroplasts was not associated either with the increase in steady-state expression of plastid antioxidative genes (Lepisto and Rintamaki, 2012) or with the higher level of antioxidative enzymes in chloroplasts (Fig. 4). The elevated ROS production in SD-thylakoids has been assigned to increased activity of pseudocyclic electron transport in Photosystem I (PSI) (Michelet and Krieger-Liszkay, 2011). It has been hypothesized that the increased production of ROS by PSI in SD-chloroplast is controlled by an unknown protein (Michelet and Krieger-Liszkay, 2011), suggesting that the ROS production in SD-chloroplast is inducible. This hypothetical inducible change in the redox state of chloroplast may operate in adjusting the chloroplast metabolism to daily light/dark rhythm. Starch content in the leaves at the end of the light period positively correlates with the length of the photoperiod (Fig. 5) (GibonNone, 2004,2009;LuNone, 2005;Smith and Stitt, 2007) and with the initial degradation rate of starch during the night (Supplementary Fig. S5) (GibonNone, 2004,2009;LuNone, 2005;Smith and Stitt, 2007;Graf and Smith, 2011;HadrichNone, 2011). The accumulation rate of starch, however, is higher in SD-grown leaves than in LD-grown leaves at the beginning of the photoperiod (Fig. 5) (LuNone, 2005;Smith and Stitt, 2007;GibonNone, 2004,2009). GibonNone(2004)proposed that, in SD-grown plants, the total depletion of sugars at the end of the dark period inhibits the immediate utilization of carbon for growth at the onset of the next light period, which stimulates starch synthesis in SD-acclimated plants. The molecular mechanism(s) of this long-term control of starch synthesis in SD-plants is still unknown. Mutations of circadian clock components have demonstrated that starch degradation is controlled by the circadian clock by an unknown mechanism that matches the remobilization of starch with the length of the night (GrafNone, 2010). This control probably operates at the post-translational level of the enzymes degrading starch during the night period (Graf and Smith, 2011). Characterization ofntrclines has demonstrated that the knockout of NTRC modifies starch metabolism inArabidopsisleaves (Fig. 5) (MichalskaNone, 2009). The starch degradation rate correlated linearly with the content of starch at the end of the photoperiod independently of the knockout of NTRC, suggesting that NTRC is not a major redox regulator of the starch degradation pathway (Fig. 5andSupplementary Figs S5andS6). Our findings, however, are in accordance with the conclusion byMichalskaNone(2009)that NTRC is an important redox regulator of starch synthesis. The accumulation of starch accelerated in Col-0 leaves in the last 4h of the SD and LD photoperiod, whereas only minor changes were observed in the apparent accumulation rate of starch during the light period inntrclines (Fig. 5). This result suggests thatArabidopsisleaves lacking NTRC are not capable of accelerating starch synthesis in light. Flux control analysis has shown that AGPase has a large impact on the flux of hexoses to starch in chloroplasts (StittNone, 2010). The rise in the levels of 3-phosphoglyceric acid and Piactivates and inhibits leaf-type AGPase activity (CrevillenNone, 2003), respectively. This regulation couples the activity of AGPase to the light reactions, to the flux of the Calvin cycle, and to transport of triose phosphates from the chloroplast to the cytosol. AGPase is also redox modulated by thioredoxins (Supplementary Fig. S6) (HendriksNone, 2003;GibonNone, 2004,MichalskaNone, 2009;ThormahlenNone, 2013). Reduction of the intermolecular cysteine bridge between small subunits (APS1) of the enzyme by chloroplast thioredoxins increases the enzyme activity by fourfold (BallicoraNone, 2000). Reduced AGPase has a higher affinity to ATP and a higher sensitivity to the allosteric activator 3-phosphoglyceric acid (BallicoraNone, 2000), suggesting that the chloroplast redox state controls the fine-tuning of the AGPase activityin vivo. We propose thatntrclines are incapable of fine-tuning of AGPase activity and consequently, SD-grownntrcleaves in particular suffer a shortage of energy during long nights resulting in reduced growth (Table 1). The role of NTRC in starch synthesis and the impact of the redox regulation of AGPasein vivohave, however, recently been under discussion. LiNone(2012)reported that the growth ofntrclines in dim light under LD conditions did not cause any growth retardation or any decline in the accumulation of starch in comparison with Col-0 leaves. They concluded that retarded growth ofntrcplants under moderate light intensity is due to oxidative stress caused by the imbalanced antioxidative systems inntrcleaves and that the redox regulation of AGPase has no physiological impact on starch synthesis (LiNone, 2012). In contrast,HadrichNone(2011)showed with transgenic lines expressing permanently reduced AGPase that the redox regulation of AGPase controls the flux of hexoses to starch, and that the redox control of AGPase was more crucial for plants acclimated to SD conditions. We have shown that the chloroplasts of SD-grown plants have a higher tendency to produce ROS in light (Fig. 3) (Michelet and Krieger-Liszkay, 2011),which may challenge the redox control of thioredoxin-dependent enzymes. Previously, thioredoxins and ROS have been shown to oppositely influence the activity of redox-regulated enzymes (RintamakiNone, 2000;MartinsuoNone, 2003). We propose that the need for redox regulation of starch synthesis, and consequently the extent of growth retardation inntrclines, is conditional, depending on the activities of carbon fixation and utilization of sugars in the sinks. We have reported previously that, in constant light intensity, the relative growth ofntrcplants in comparison with Col-0 plants was less retarded at 10 degrees C than at 20 degrees C under a SD photoperiod (LepistoNone, 2009). Thus, thentrcphenotype is less severe under conditions demanding less rapid starch synthesis either due to a low activity of the Calvin cycle (under low light or low temperature;LiNone, 2012;LepistoNone, 2009) or due to a high sink activity (high growth rate of LD-acclimated plants;GibonNone, 2004,2009). We presume that under such conditions other chloroplast thioredoxins, probably thioredoxin f (ThormahlenNone, 2013), are able to maintain reasonable redox stages of AGPase inntrcchloroplats to support starch synthesis. We conclude that NTRC is a significant redox regulator of AGPase activity under conditions where the fine-tuning of starch synthesis during the photoperiod is essential for survival of plants. Supplementary data are available atJXBonline. Supplementary Fig. S1. Phenotypes ofA. thalianaCol-0 andntrcrosettes after growth for equal hours of light under various photoperiods. Supplementary Fig. S2. Accumulation of H2O2inA. thalianaCol-0 andntrcunder SD and LD photoperiods. Supplementary Fig. S3. Accumulation of soluble sugars inA. thalianaCol-0 andntrcplants under SD and LD conditions. Supplementary Fig. S4. Starch accumulation in chloroplasts ofA. thalianaplants grown under SD conditions. Supplementary Fig. S5. Correlation between the initial rate of starch degradation at night and the starch content at the end of the photoperiod inA. thalianaCol-0 andntrcplants. Supplementary Fig. S6. Interaction of the TRX domain of NTRC with 2-CysPrx B and the small subunit of AGPase in a yeast two-hybrid assay. Supplementary Table S1. Rosette dry weights inA. thalianaCol-0 andntrcplants grown under various L/D rhythms for equal hours of light. Supplementary Table S2. H2O2-derived hydroxyl radical production byA. thalianathylakoids measured by spin-trapping EPR spectroscopy. Supplementary Table S3. Primers and description of the yeast two-hybrid assay.