Development of ultrasensitive indicators of biological responses to low doses of ionizing radiation (IR) (e.g., less than 0.1 Gy (10 cGy)) is of paramount importance to eventually understanding how to predict health risks to humans. Low dose exposures of less than =10 cGy can occur during space flight, during remediation of radiation-contaminated materials, after radiation accidents, or after a 'dirty bomb'. Studies of cellular responses to low doses of IR ( less than =10 cGy) are confounded by various factors, such as cell type investigated, radionuclide, the oxygen level in the culture medium, cell cycle stage at the time of exposure, whether primary or immortalized cells are used, and whether cells have intact tumor suppressor (e.g., p53 or pRb) functions. At 10 cGy, given estimates of DNA lesions created by low linear energy transfer (LET) IR exposures, less than four DNA double strand breaks (DSBs) and fewer than 100 DNA single strand breaks (SSBs) are expected, suggesting that few DNA damage sensors would be activated. Indeed, most available evidence strongly suggest that onlyAtaxia telangiectasiamutated kinase (ATM) is activated by DNA damage created by low doses of low LET IR doses (1), probably due to oxidative stress (2-4). Indeed, gammaH2AX foci formation in response to low doses of IR strongly suggest that ATM activation does occur, presumably due to the formation of DSBs as a result of replication through unrepaired SSBs. To detect these responses and to assess their affects on human heath, 'biodosimeters' are needed. Current biodosimeters under development are mostly based on DNA damage and repair pathways, such as detection of DSB formation and repair by gamma-H2AX foci assessments (5-7). Unfortunately, the detection and repair of DNA lesion responses are generally rapidly formed and repaired, leaving such 'biodosimeters' as very limited tools to detect low dose IR exposures (5,6). Alternatively, lymphocytes from blood samples or skin/hair samples of affected individuals can be analyzed for micronuclei formation (8,9) or premature chromosome condensation (PCC) assessments for chromosomal aberrations (10). While useful for assessing exposure, these assays do not monitor responses of tissues known to be prone to carcinogenesis as a result of low dose IR exposures. Currently, no developed 'biodosimeter' has been able to assess the human health effects of low doses of IR, but research is ongoing towards that goal and most likely no one biodosimetry system will be able to solve all needs for assessing human health effects. Nevertheless, development of biodosimeters based on known regulatory functions that can assess exposures in responsive and sensitive tissues in a noninvasive manner, and repeatedly over time, are desperately needed. Biodosimeters that can establish basal responses and monitor damage-induced reporters over time as a function of dose are also desperately needed. Recently, DNA damage- and senescence-induced secreted proteins (i.e., an 'induced secretome') have been identified as an important response to low doses of IR (11-13). Identifying low dose IR-responsive expression pathways that ultimately result in expression of secreted proteins that could have biological impacts on exposed, as well as non-exposed, cells would strongly suggest that not all cells have to be irradiated for entire tissues to respondin vivo. To date, few pathways activatedin vivoin response to low doses of IR have been elucidated. Recently, we delineated a unique pathway of regulation of insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) expression in response to low doses of IRin vitro(1,14,15). We demonstrated that IGF-1 was repressed by p53/NF-YA complexes in its basal state at one unique NF-Y regulatory site in the IGF-1 promoter, whose binding was lost after low dose IR exposures in an ATM-dependent manner in cells deficient in p53 function, resulting in sCLU expression. Regulation of IGF-1 promoter activity and ligand expression, and thus sCLU, was rate-limited by p21 and an ill-defined ATM-dependent modification of NF-YA in cells, even though p53 stabilization and protein induction occurred (1). IGF-1 expression has been linked to cytoprotection of irradiated cellsin vitroand tissuesin vivo, however, underlying mechanisms of cytoprotection have not been demonstrated (16). Secretory clusterin (sCLU) is a known low dose IR-inducible secreted protein that is regulated by IGF-1 signaling and can confer significant cytoprotection to cellsin vitroafter exposure to high dose IR challenges conferring an 'adaptive response' (14,15). In fact, since numerous cancers constitutively over-express sCLU as a pro-survival and pro-growth factor, strategies using antisense oligomers (17,18) or siRNA nanoparticles (19) have been developed to enhance chemo- and radio-therapies against human prostate and lung cancers. sCLU can bind and sequester BAX in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) of cells, thereby preventing drug- and radiation-induced apoptosis (20-22). Thus, low dose IR-inducible IGF-1-sCLU expression from cellsin vitroor in tissuesin vivocould afford significant cytoprotective bystander functions. To date, however, most low dose IR-induced bystander effects reported support 'induction' of cytotoxic factors that increase damage in non-irradiated cells (Reviewed in ref. (23)). A detailed study of a cytoprotective bystander factor has not been reported. Since we previously linked IGF-1 signaling to expression of pro-survival sCLU levels, we hypothesized that expression of the IGF-1-sCLU axis would: (i) allow development of a potent and ultrasensitive biodosimeter of live cells using the human clusterin (CLU) promoter linked to firefly luciferase (hCLUp-Luc) expression for bioluminescence imaging (BLI); BLI allows for non-invasive temporal quantitative imaging of cells and tissue in real time and greatly increases the sensitivity of detectionin vitroandin vivo; and (ii) result in expression of a secreted protein expression axis that would have significant pro-survival bystander effectsin vivo. Here, we demonstrate for the first time that cellsin vitroand transgenic micein vivocontaining the hCLUp-Luc reporter can be used as an extremely sensitive and potentially important reporter system to repeatedly image responses of irradiated live cells and tissues. We present evidence that IGF-1-sCLU expression in specific radiation-sensitive tissuesin vivois controlled by low dose IR activation of TGFbeta1, consistent with prior findings of the activation of this tumor suppressor cytokine protein. The IGF-1-sCLU expression axis is long-lived and extremely responsive to low doses of IR, as well as to other cytotoxic agents (1), making it ideal for future use as a 'biomarker' for biological responses to low dose IR exposures. We demonstrate that exogenous reporter responses matched endogenous sCLU protein expression responses in dose-response and temporal kinetics, and that tissues differ in dose-and time-responses to low doses (i.e., 2 cGy) versus higher doses of IR. Importantly, induction of sCLU at low doses of IR, from 1-100 cGy, were linear for cellsin vitroand tissuein vivo, however, expression of sCLU could not be extrapolated from high doses, and non-linear responses were clearly indicated at doses greater than 1 Gy. Mechanistically, we demonstrate evidence of a negative feedback regulatory bystander loop in which low dose IR activated TGFbeta1-mediated signaling induced sCLU. However, subsequent elevated levels of sCLU in the media, in turn, suppress TGFbeta1 signaling and thereby expression of sCLU protein levels. Homeostatic responses in colon are compared to the apparent non-homeostatic responses in bone marrow in the same animal. Suppression of TGFbeta1 signaling by sCLU in the medium ultimately results in protection of TGFbeta1-exposed cells from growth suppression, apoptosis and cytotoxicity. The potential importance of this cytoprotective bystander effect in terms of risk to low dose IR-exposed patients is discussed. We previously reported that IGF-1-sCLU expression was induced in human or mouse epithelial cells with long-lived (peaking 24-28 h post-exposure) responses to low doses of IR ( greater than =2 cGy) (14,15,24,25), but only in cells compromised for p53 function. Importantly, IGF-1R-Src-MAPK-Erk1/2-Egr1 signaling was upstream of CLU promoter transactivation (14). We hypothesized that the human clusterin promoter linked to a firefly luciferase reporter (hCLUp-Luc) would be a sensitive reporter system capable of responding to very low doses of IR. To generate such a 'biodosimeter', a 1403 bp hCLU promoter region was cloned upstream from the firefly luciferase reporter, creating hCLUp-Luc. hCLUp-Luc was stably integrated into MCF-7 breast cancer cells, and BLI used to quantify induction. BLI was compared to standard luciferase assays. Responses of cells with integrated hCLUp-Luc directly mimicked endogenous gene expression in dose-response and time-course studies as reported in MCF-7 cells (1,14,15); MCF-7 cells have elevated Mdm2 levels that compromise p53 function (26). Responses of stably integrated hCLUp-Luc MCF-7 cells were identical to various human and mouse cells transiently transfected with hCLUp-Luc to characterize time-course and dose-response expression using BLI or standard luminometer assessments. We first optimized BLI of hCLUp-Luc expression from irradiated (0.02 - 5.0 Gy) stably integrated MCF-7 cells to compensate for cosmic ray background and increase signal/noise ratios in live cells, where repeated measurements in the same cells under optimal cell pellet conditions were made (Supplemental Figures 1A, 1Band2A-2D). We then explored expression in dose-response and time-course studies (Figure 1). Log-phase MCF-7 cells were irradiated with various doses of IR (0, 0.2, 0.5 1.0 and 5.0 Gy) and induction assessed 72 and 96 h (Figures 1A, 1Bat 96 h) later using BLI; sCLU induction involves both ATM-mediated loss of p53/NF-YA binging to the IGF-1 promoter and induction/accumulation of IGF-1 that takes greater than 24 h for the expression cascade to show optimal induction (1,14,25). Significant hCLUp-Luc promoter activity was noted after 20 cGy, and expression dramatically increased with increasing IR doses (Figures 1A, 1B). Linear expression with dose (r=0.987) was noted with exposures between 20 to 100 cGy, but hCLUp-Luc reporter activity and sCLU protein expression responses reached plateau levels at doses greater than 1 Gy (Figures 1B, inset); exogenous reporter and endogenous sCLU protein expression were consistently expressed with increasing doses of IR (Figure 1B); in insert, psCLU and sCLU represent related immature and mature sCLU protein forms, respectively, as described (1). In time-course studies, exposure of MCF-7 cells with 10 cGy caused greater than 2-fold induction of sCLU at 96 h. As cells were exposed to higher doses of IR (up to 5 Gy), hCLUp-Luc promoter induction responses were significantly faster, with ~3-fold induction, 48 h after 5 Gy (Figure 1D). Thus, both the magnitude and temporal kinetics of CLU induction were directly proportional to the dose of IR exposure of log-phase MCF-7 cells, consistent with expression of the endogenous CLU gene (14,15). Similar responses were noted in all mouse and human cells examined, even when transient transfections were used instead of stable clones (14,15). In general, expression of hCLUp-Luc and sCLU protein expression was linear with dose, up to 1.0 Gy (r=0.987,Figure 1B), but reached plateau levels with higher doses. We previously demonstrated that endogenous sCLU expression was repressed by functional p53 (14,15). Similarly, wild-type p53 (wtp53) HCT116 cells transiently transfected with the hCLUp-Luc promoter reporter and imaged using BLI showed significantly less hCLUp-Luc activity compared to isogenic p53-/-HCT116 cells, where p53 was somatically knocked out (Figure 2A). p53 function can also be affected by alterations in or PTEN, whose activities enhance or prevent, respectively, the efficacy of Mdm2 to degrade p53 (26). Loss of p53 function would, in turn, allow sCLU expression in stable hCLUp-Luc MCF-7 cells. Indeed, alterations that compromised p53 function (e.g., PTENCA or E6 over-expression) led to elevated hCLUp-Luc activities, whereas conditions that enhanced p53 suppressor activity (i.e., down-regulation of AKT with AKTKD expression or forced over-expression of p53) repressed hCLUp-Luc activities in stable hCLUp-Luc MCF-7 cells, even after exposure to IR using BLI (Figure 2B). Similar responses were noted in HCT116 cells using luminometer assessments (Supplemental Figures 3,4). Thus, the hCLUp-Luc biodosimeter used in transient or stable transfections emulates endogenous regulation of the CLU gene. We reported that CLU promoter transactivation and sCLU expression were regulated by upstream IGF-1R signaling (14). We confirmed that IGF-1 and CLU promoter activities correlated well in temporal expression kinetics after IR (0.1 Gy) using BLI (Figure 2C) in MCF-7 cells. Although the response from the hIGF-1p-Luc reporter was slightly faster than hCLUp-Luc, both promoter reporters were dramatically increased in response to low doses of IR using BLI. Similar data were found by standard luminometer measurements using protein levels or RSV-beta-gal expression standardization (14). In separate studies, we found that administration of AG1024, an IGF-1R receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor, dramatically suppressed CLU promoter and sCLU protein expression, while IGF-1 promoter and ligand expression were not affected (1). Thus, hIGF-1p-Luc and hCLUp-Luc reporters were useful indicators of low dose IR exposures. Since p53 suppresses IGF-1-sCLU expression (1) and TGFbeta1 exposure can induce Mdm2 resulting in p53 degradation (26), we examined sCLU induction after TGFbeta1 treatments in HCT116 (TbetaRII-)versusisogenic HCT116 3-6 (TbetaRII+) cells. TbetaRII-deficient HCT116 cells were restored for TbetaRII expression, creating HCT116 3-6 cells (27). In response to various TGFbeta1 doses, only HCT116 3-6 cells were dramatically growth arrested compared to HCT116 (TbetaRII-) cells using changes in 3H-Thyd incorporation into DNA in a 48 h time period (Figure 2D). Cells inFigure 2Dwere then examined for changes in expression of sCLU, in which a significant increase (~3-fold) in sCLU protein expression (monitored by the ~60 kDa precursor clusterin (psCLU) levels) was found in HCT116 3-6 cells by as little as 0.5 ng/ml TGFbeta1 (Figure 2E). In time-course studies, induction of psCLU occurred by 18 h in HCT116 3-6 cells exposed to 5 ng/ml TGFbeta1 (Figure 2E, lower panel). Finally, we directly compared mature sCLU induction responses (sCLU) in HCT116 compared to HCT116 3-6 cells after exposure to mock-treatments (UT), IR (5 Gy), or TGFbeta1 (5 ng/ml) (Figure 2F). Significant induction of sCLU ( greater than 30-fold) was only noted in TbetaRII+ HCT116 3-6 cells at 48 h with concomitant and significant loss of steady state p53 levels, consistent with TGFbeta1-induced induction of Mdm2 and subsequent p53 degradation (26). TbetaRII- HCT116 cells were not responsive to TGFbeta1. In contrast, exposure of either cells to IR (5 Gy) failed to induce significant sCLU levels, while p53 stabilization was noted in both cells. We then generated a transgenic hCLUp-Luc reporter mouse in an FVB/N genetic background and examined the responses of age (10 week)- and weight (18 gram)-matched male and female mice after exposure to whole body low doses of IR (e.g., 0.1 Gy). Irradiation of female versus male mice induced BLI expression in specific internal organs of both genders of mice at 24 h. Greater responses were, however, routinely noted in femaleversusmale mice (Figure 3A). Increased expression of hCLUp-Luc activity in female mice may be related to the known testosterone-repression of this gene in male mice; the CLU gene is also referred to as testosterone-repressed prostate message-2 (TRPM-2) (reviewed in ref. (28)). Ex vivoimaging of internal organs of female mice demonstrated dramatic induction of hCLUp-Luc promoter activities in bone marrow, spleen, colon, thymus (Figure 3B) and mammary glands (not shown). In contrast, imaging of muscle, heart, liver or pancreas did not demonstrate significant hCLUp-Luc activities by BLI at any time. BLI orex vivoimaging of control non-irradiated mice or tissue showed little hCLUp-Luc expression. Since sCLU can be induced by activated TGFbeta1 (29), and low dose IR exposure is known to activate TGFbeta1 (30), we examined whether sCLU responsesin vivoby hCLUp-Luc and by endogenous sCLU induction by Western blotting using excised tissues, as indicated, were prevented by intraperitoneal administration of a alpha-TGFbeta1 (1D11, 5 mg/Kg) versus a control IgG antibody (13C4, 5 mg/kg) (Figure 3C). The 1D11 antibody neutralizes all three forms of the TGFbeta family (31). Indeed, both endogenous sCLU, as well as hCLUp-Luc reporter induction, responses were suppressed in colon, bone marrow, spleen and mammary gland tissue by administration of the a-TGFbeta1 antibody, whereas the control 13C4 isotype antibody had no affect (Figure 3C). Since p53 can repress IGF-1-sCLU expression after IR, but not in response to TGFbeta1 exposure (32), we suspected that induction of hCLUp-Lucin vivoin transgenic mice was due to activation of TGFbeta1 signaling after low doses of IR (whole body irradiation (0.1 Gy) of female FVBN mice) (Figures 4A-4F). The most responsive tissues within female hCLUp-Luc reporter mice were colon and bone marrow, where temporal induction was monitored after 0.1vs.1.0 Gy exposures (Figures 4A, 4B). Interestingly, bone marrow and colon tissue responses differed in their temporal induction and longevity of CLU expression in response to 0.1 Gy treatment, where colon hCLUp-Luc reporter activities and sCLU protein expression peaked at 24 h, but waned by 48 h (Figures 4A, 4E). In contrast, bone marrow sCLU responses were significantly delayed in comparison, showing peak levels 72 h after 0.1 Gy, and remained elevated for at least 96 h post-treatment (Figures 4B, 4F). CLU induction in bone marrow tissue was more rapid after a higher dose (1.0 Gy) of IR (Figures 4B and 4F), and hCLUp-Luc reporter activities and endogenous sCLU expression levels were linear (r=0.965) with IR doses between 2-10 cGy monitored at 72 h (Figures 4D, 4F). At doses greater than 0.1 to 1.0 Gy, sCLU induction reached plateau levels and were non-linear with IR dose (Figure 4D), as previously reported for endogenous sCLU protein expression (14). Overall, sCLU induction correlated with the sensitivities of internal organs (bone marrow, spleen, thymus, mammary glands and colon) to whole body IR exposure. TGFbeta1 signaling appeared to be involved in CLU gene and sCLU expression responses (Figure 3C). Indeed, Western blot analyses of mouse colon (Figure 4E) and bone marrow (Figure 4F) tissue confirmed activation of Smad signaling (elevated phospho-Smad3/total Smad3 levels) with delayed kinetics consistent with sCLU expression; note that inFigures 4E and 4F, psCLU is the ~60 kDa precursor form of mature sCLU protein (~40 kDa) that correlated well with CLU promoter activation and mRNA expression after exposure to low doses of IR (14). Thus, IGF-1-sCLU inductionin vivoappears to be linear with very low doses (10-100 cGy), but non-linear with higher doses of IR. Induction of sCLU levelsin vivoappears to be the result of activated TGFbeta1 signaling in specific organs in response to low doses of IR, responses consistent with prior reports (33-35). TGFbeta1 activation and downstream signaling is likely a mechanism for relieving p53 repression of IGF-1 expression via Smad-activated transcriptional increases in Mdm2 (26). We then investigated the physiological role of sCLU in TGFbeta1-responsive human colon cancer cells. HCT116 3-6 cells were then knocked down for sCLU expression using siRNA-sCLU or mock-transfected using siRNA-Scr, and then interrogated for changes in TGFbeta1-induced signaling, growth arrest, and lethality (Figure 5). Specific loss (~70% knockdown) of sCLU levels in HCT116 3-6 cells transfected with siRNA-sCLU were noted compared to HCT116 3-6 cells transfected with siRNA-Scr oligomers (Figure 5A). Interesting, cells knocked down for sCLU were significantly more sensitive to TGFbeta1 growth suppression, as well as long-term survival, compared to shRNA-Scr HCT116 3-6 cells (Figure 5B). Conversely, addition of exogenous sCLU in the medium (MsCLU) significantly repressed TGFbeta1 signaling in TbetaRII- HCT116 cells transfected with the TbetaRII receptor (compare lanes 8, 9,Figure 5C). However, TGFbeta1 signaling was restored by co-addition of a polyclonal antibody specific to human sCLU (Abb5-sCLU, b5 sCLU antibody, lane 10,Figure 5C). Indeed, sCLU addition prevented TGFbeta1-induced G1cell cycle checkpoint arrest in TGF-beta1-treated TbetaRII+ HCT116 3-6 cells, which was restored by addition of Abb5-sCLU(Figure 5D). These data strongly suggested that sCLU suppressed TGFbeta1 signaling, representing a negative feedback loop that confers a cytoprotective bystander response. Since the HCT116 and HCT116 3-6 cells that we used for these studies were deficient in Bax expression and lack apoptotic responses after various cytotoxic agents (36), and sCLU is thought to protect cells from Bax-induced apoptosis (20,37), we explored responses in life-extended HMECs that were, or were not, knocked down for sCLU expression as inFigure 5(Figure 6). Indeed, sCLU knockdown (Figure 6A) augmented TGF-beta1 lethality (Figure 6B), which correlated with dramatic increases in apoptosis as monitored by TUNEL+ stained cells (Figure 6C). Addition of medium from irradiated MCF-7 cells that contained elevated levels of sCLU (MsCLU) as inFigure 5, suppressed apoptosis (Figure 6C) and restored the survival of TGFbeta1-exposed HMECs (Figure 6B). Addition of excess AbB5-sCLU, which cleared sCLU from medium as monitored by Western analyses, prevented sCLU function to block TGFbeta1 activity and restored both apoptosis (Figure 6C) and lethality (Figure 6B) caused by TGFbeta1 exposure. Thus, as with HCT116 cells (Figure 5), sCLU mediates a pro-survival bystander effect in HMECs by preventing TGFbeta1-induced signaling, and therefore, downstream growth arrest, apoptosis and lethality (Figure 6). Although IR exposure is effectively estimated using physical measurements, the actual biomedical implications of doses less than =10 cGy are not known. This is particularly true of patients exposed to low IR doses after radiation accidents, a dirty bomb, remediation of radiation-contaminated areas, or exposure to low IR doses during space flight. To better understand the biological effects of low dose IR exposures, a search is on for specific 'functional biological response biomarkers'. Unfortunately, most DNA damage response biomarkers are short-lived, noted only after high IR doses, and are not amenable to extrapolation to low dose IR exposures. Among DNA damage sensors (DNA-PK, ATR, and ATM), only ATM activation is reproducibly induced after low doses ( less than =10 cGy) of IR (recently reviewed in ref. (38)), and is the basis of most developing gamma-H2AX biodosimeters. We recently linked induction of sCLU after low doses of IR, as well as after low doses of many other DNA damaging agents in human and rodent cells (14,15), to the specific induction of IGF-1 by ATM activation (1) or TGFbeta1. IGF-1-sCLU expression is hypersensitive to IR, as well as many other cytotoxic stresses, including elevated O2exposures and agents that do not damage DNA, but alter osmotic homeostasis (21). IGF-1-sCLU induction is long-lived and proportional to IR exposures between 10-100 cGyin vitro(Figure 1) andin vivo(Figure 4). Due to its extreme sensitivity to IR and other cytotoxic agents, we decided to use the hCLUp-Luc reporter to monitor induction kinetics of this low dose stress-response gene as a first step in the development of a sensitive biodosimeter that may one day be used to assess risk to human health. sCLU expression is complex, with known induction responses after a variety of cell stress events, all culminating in ATM-IGF-1 (1) or TGFbeta1-Smad-IGF-1 stimulation. Our recent data on endogenous IGF-1-sCLU expression strongly suggested a complex expression axis that is naturally and basally repressed by wtp53 (1). Data presented inFigure 2also indicate that alterations in PI3K and AKT affect sCLU expression, consistent with a role of AKT affecting p53 function (39) by altering Mdm2 levels (26). Thus, this reporter system may be used to tease out regulatory factors that govern its expression, allowing future elucidation of signaling pathways and transcription factors stimulated by low doses of IR or other environmental cytotoxic agents. Since both IGF-1 and sCLU are secreted proteins that play roles in survival (IGF-1 and sCLU) and clearance of cell debris from traumatized tissue (sCLU) (9), we hypothesize that this expression axis plays a major role in wound healing and recovery (28,37)in vivo. Thus, monitoring IGF-1-sCLU levels may not only allow assessment of the biological effects of low dose IR exposures, but may one day be used for assessment of normal versus abnormal recovery responses that affect potential health risks to individuals. Our development and initial assessment of this biodosimetry reporter system is but a first step in validating this system. Long-term carcinogenesis experiments, crossing transgenic hCLUp-Luc reporter animals with cancer-susceptible mice (e.g., p53-null or mutant K-ras) mice are warranted. Transient IGF-1-sCLU expression may be healthy in normal cells, but constitutive inductionin vivomay indicate acquired damage-induced or mutation-mediated long-term genetic instability, as recently shown for repair-compromised cells (1). Responses in colon versus bone marrow after exposure to 10 cGy are intriguing in this context. Since IGF-1-sCLU induction responses of cells and tissues occur on the order of days post-exposure, and are directly linked to ATM (gamma-H2AX formation downstream) activation, assessing tissue and sera levels immediately after an exposure event, and before induction occurs, would allow establishment of baseline levels. Then, hours and days after presumed low dose or dose-rate IR exposures, induction of this gene may be used as a valuable assessment of IR doses with biological meaning. Standard curves after various doses of specific agents (e.g., IR) can be easily performed (Figure 4). For example, our preliminary studies show that IGF-1-sCLU expression can be induced by low doses of high LET IR (e.g., iron, Luo et al., unpublished data), suggesting that this biodosimetry system can be used to evaluate exposures that organisms might experience in space. Since transient transfections of human or mouse cells with the lentiviral-mediated hCLUp-Luc reporter demonstrates the same dose- and time-dependency of expression as endogenous IGF-1-sCLU, samples from irradiated patients may be directly assessed. The upstream signaling link to ATM or TGFbeta1 also means that this system should complement 'foci formation'-based systems that are also under development. IR induction of IGF-1-sCLU expression via activation of TGFbeta1in vivooffers a new wrinkle to an already complex story of IR-ATM-IGF-1-IGF-1R regulation. Previously, exposure of human and rodent cellsin vitroup-regulated IGF-1R levels through ATM activation (40-42). Furthermore, links between ATM and TGFbeta1 exposures were reported, whereby TGFbeta1 signaling augmented ATM activation (33-35), and activation of TGFbeta1 by an as yet poorly described ROS pathway after low doses of IR seem extremely important in carcinogenesis (30). Since p53 repressed IGF-1-sCLU expression (1,14) so efficientlyin vitro, we were surprised to find the robust up-regulation of this expression axis in normal tissue of low dose IR-exposed mice, particularly in tissues that are typically hypersensitive to IR (Figures 3and4). Our data suggest that these induction responses may be mediated by TGFbeta1, and its downstream activation of Smad3 signaling. Indeed, evidence for activation of Smad signaling in only tissues expressing hCLUp-Luc reporter activity and sCLU protein expression after low doses of IR were noted (Figures 3and4), with tissue induction response kinetics that matched endogenous sCLU protein induction. Our finding of the activation of Smad signaling in tissues of animals exposed to low doses (0.1 Gy) of IR are consistent with prior findings of low dose IR activation of TGFbeta1 (33). By activating TGFbeta1in vivo, which most likely further augments ATM activity, p53 function and phosphorylation of NF-YA are promoted through elevated p21 levels that 'permit' IGF-1 promoter induction (1,32). p21 inhibits cdk-induced NF-YA phosphorylation that is required for p53/NF-YA; this has recently been confirmed in lung, colon and breast cancers and a detailed account of this mechanism by TGFbeta1 will soon be reported (Zou and Boothman et al., unpublished data). Simultaneously, TGFbeta1-activated Smad signaling also results in induction of LEF-1/beta-catenin, that is required for IGF-1-betaCLU induction (Zou and Boothman et al., unpublished data). Thus, TGFbeta1-activated Smad signaling in tissues hypersensitive to IR induced IGF-1-sCLU expression, presumably required for tissue recovery. Induction in normal tissues is transient and not identical in various exposed tissue (i.e., bone marrowvscolon,Figure 4). Thus, different tissues may have different risks after low doses of IR. For example, analyses of mammary and lung tissues after various high LET exposures is currently underway in our lab. The danger for cells within specific tissue is that if damage persists, as a result of genetic instability through loss or faulty repair or permanent mutation or memory, IGF-1-sCLU expression could be 'permanently' turned on. In genetically unstable cells, such as neoplastic-initiated cells, IGF-1-sCLU expression can be dramatically elevated compared to matched stable cells due to loss of p53 function and ATM activation (1). Permanent IGF-1-sCLU elevation appears to be an early marker of genetic instability in tissues of individuals exposed to low doses of IR or other toxins. Permanently elevated levels of IGF-1-sCLU in tissues of IR exposed cells could also indicate an altered microenvironment that may promote tumor growth and progression, including EMT activation and metastasis. Irradiated tissue responses may be responding to trauma by inducing IGF-1-sCLU for simultaneous wound healing and cell debris clearance to avoid multiple organ dysfunction (MOD) (21). However, formation of genetically unstable cells, or cells with long-lived memory of IR damage would tend to permanently up-regulate IGF-1-sCLU expression (1). Indeed, elevated IGF-1-sCLU expression was noted in cells that have long-lived IR genetic instability, and in cells deficient in DSB, DNA mismatch, base excision, and nucleotide excision repair systems (1). Such permanent expression of IGF-1-sCLU would enable a 'changed' tissue microenvironment that could enhance the risk of tumor formation and progression. Such responses may be amplified by the downstream ability of sCLU to specifically suppress TGF-beta1 signaling (Figures 5and6). Since TGFbeta1 is a natural tumor suppressor, a tissue microenvironment elevated in IGF-1-sCLU may further support tumor growth (after the initial damage-induced TGFbeta1-mediated signaling event) through bystander suppression of endogenous Smad signaling, mediated by endogenous TGFbeta1 from the stroma. Further research on the pro-survival and pro-metastatic functions of IR-induced IGF-1-sCLU expression, particularly after low dose IR-exposed genetically altered 'initiated' cells, or from senescent cells, could be a major factor affecting the health risk of specific tissues of individuals exposed to low doses of IR. This is particularly true in tissues that are relatively hypersensitive to IR, including the colon, thymus, bone marrow, spleen, and mammary tissue. AG1024 (a specific IGF-1 receptor (IGF-1R) tyrosine kinase inhibitor) was obtained from EMD Chemicals (Gibbstown, NJ). Insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) was obtained from R D Systems (Minneapolis, MN). TGFbeta1 was obtained from the Sigma/Aldrich Chemical Company (St. Louis, MO). Ultrapure luciferin was obtained in bulk from the Case Western or UT Southwestern Cancer Center Imaging Cores and used in luciferase assay reagent (LAR) assays (Promega, Madison, WI). 3H-Thymidine (3H-Thyd) was obtained from New England Nuclear Co. (Boston, MA). The human 1403 bp CLU promoter fused to luciferase (hCLUp-Luc) was previously described (14,15,43). The hIGF-1p-luc construct was previously described (1). Subcloning p53 cDNA into the pcDNA3.1-N-term-Flag construct created flag-tagged CMV-p53 cDNA. Constitutive-active PTEN (PTENCA) and kinase-deficient ATK1 (AKTKD) were obtained from Dr. Lindsey Mayo (Indiana University). Antibodies specific to mouse (M18) and human (B5) sCLU, as well as gamma-H2AX, p53 and alpha-tubulin were purchased from Santa Cruz, as were GAPDH andalpha-tubulin used for loading. Antibodies to phosphorylated Smad3 (p-Smad3, C25A9) or total Smad3 (t-Smad3, C67H9) were from Cell Signaling (Billerica, MA). Immunoblotting was performed as described (14) and relative protein levels quantified from x-ray films using NIH image J software as described (14). Anti-TGF-beta1 murine monoclonal antibody (1D11) that neutralizes the three TGF-beta isoforms (31), and an isotype-matched control IgG1 monoclonal antibody (13C4, raised against Shigella toxin) were provided by Genzyme Corp. (Framingham, MA). Human MCF-7 breast cancer cells and a stably transfected 1403 MCF-7 clone (MCF-7 cells containing stably integrated 1403 bp CLU promoter fused to firefly luciferase) were cultured in DMEM (BioWhittacker; Walkersville, MA) containing 10% fetal bovine serum (HyClone; Utah, USA). Human HCT116 colorectal carcinoma parental (DNA mismatch repair (MMR)-defective, TbetaRII-), a corrected clone (HCT116 3-6 cells, MMR+, TbetaRII+), and p53-/-cell lines were confirmed for p53, MMR and TbetaRII expression statuses as described (44,45) and grown in 10% FBS-DMEM. Growth arrest responses of these cells to TGFbeta1 were monitored by changes in3H-Thyd incorporation into DNA using standard protocols. Human mammary epithelial cells (HMECs), life-extended using hTERT and CD4 over-expression, were kindly obtained from Dr. David Euhus (UT Southwestern). All cells and their stable derivatives were maintained at 37 degrees C at 5% CO2-95% air. For TGFbeta1 or IGF-1 treatments, cells were serum-starved (0.5% FBS) overnight, and exposed to IGF-1 or TGFbeta1 at the indicated doses in normal serum-DMEM. Cell irradiations were performed using a JL Shepherd137Cs Mark I-68 irradiator (3.87 Gy/min) with appropriate shielding to lower dose rate for accurate whole body irradiations at low doses. Mock-irradiated or DMSO-treated (UT) cells were treated identically to IR- or TGFbeta1-exposed cells without cytotoxin treatments. All cells were routinely tested and found free of mycoplasma. Cells were transiently transfected with hIGF-1p-Luc or hCLUp-Luc reporter constructs and RSV-beta-gal as a transfection control using Fugene 6 (Roche) as described (1,28). Treatments, where indicated, were performed 24 h after transfection. Luciferase activities were analyzed using the Luciferase Assay System (Promega, Madison, WI). beta-Galactosidase activities were determined using the Galacto-Star reagent (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA). All experiments were normalized for protein amounts using Bradford assays (Bio-Rad). For generation of CLU promoter-luciferase stable MCF-7 cells, cells were co-transfected with the hCLUp-Luc construct together with 2-fold excess pcDNA-3 that contained a G418-resistance gene. Cells were then selected with G418 and resistant clones isolated as described (14). Isolates were then treated with IR, other cytotoxic agents (1,14) or TGFbeta1 and analyzed for hCLUp-Luc reporter activities, as well as endogenous sCLU expression. A clone with identical hCLUp-Luc activities monitored by luciferase activities (1,14) and endogenous sCLU protein expression by Western blotting (see below), was selected and examined for induction by low doses of IR. HCT116 and HMEC cells were transiently knocked down for sCLU expression using an siRNA-sCLU specifically directed to the coding sequence for the CLU mRNA leader peptide sequence as described (1); specificity of the siRNA using mutated sCLU cDNA was previously demonstrated (14). Control cells were transfected with siRNA-nonsense/scrambled (shRNA-Scr) sequence. Knockdown of sCLU steady state protein levels were confirmed by Western blotting using alpha-tubulin or GAPDH as loading controls. BLI imaging was described (43). Suspensions of log-phase MCF-7 hCLUp-Luc cells were mock- or IR-treated with various doses of IR. Immediately after IR treatment, cells were seeded onto 10 cm or 96-well dishes containing black coatings between wells (Corning Life Sciences, Acton, MA) to eliminate light scatter during imaging, and allowed to grow as needed. Initially, optimization of pelleted cells was performed to obtain the best signal-to-noise ratio for detection of hCLU promoter activity, since high-density suspensions quench luciferase light emissions due to high absorbance rates (Supplemental Figure 1). Cells were harvested by trypsinization 72 h after IR treatment, and suspensions of cells with various concentrations were made in Luciferase Assay Reagent (LAR) (Promega). Cell suspensions (~107cells) were added to wells of a 96-well plate and imaged immediately. However, to maintain the ability to repeatedly image cells on different days, we also optimized imaging of luciferase activity in intact MCF-7 hCLUp-Luc cell monolayers. These experiments were performed at various times post-IR (14,43) by adding LAR to cells and mounting plates in a light-tight box using an ultrasensitive CCD camera chilled with liquid nitrogen (Xenogen Vivovision IVIS Lumina Imaging system). Since the required integration time for observing CLU promoter activity after very low doses of IR exceeded conventional integration times for CCD camera BLI (~33 msecs), all images obtained contained random cosmic ray events, resulting in high valued pixel intensities. To eliminate cosmic ray contamination, we developed and implemented a correction algorithm using an adaptive median filtering program for pixel substitution (Supplemental Figure 2). The code was written using MatLab, version 6.5 software (MathWorks, Natick, MA). Both luciferase-induced luminescence and reference plate black and white images were taken. For presentation, images were subsequently processed to generate overlay colored images using MatLab software. To quantify promoter activities, gray scale values (GSVs) were calculated in areas of interest (wells) and background subtracted using NIH Image J software. Experiments were independently repeated three times in triplicate wells. Statistical significance between groups was evaluated using paired Student's t-tests. A 1403 bp promoter region of the human CLU gene was amplified using PCR and the following primers: 5'-GATCCATTCCCGATTCCTCATCG-3' and 5'-GCGTTGTGGGCACTGGGAG-3', located at positions -1403 and -17 of humanclupromoter, respectively. The high fidelity Elongase enzyme (Gibco) was used for the amplifying reaction. After purification by agarose gel electrophoresis, the fragment was phosphorylated using polynucleotide kinase (Fisher Sci., Inc) and inserted into the SmaI site of the pA3luc luciferase reporter vector (a generous gift from Dr. R. Pestell, Thomas Jefferson University). The resultant hCLUp-Luc DNA construct was sequenced and confirmed accurate by GenBank sequence comparison. hCLUp-Luc was used to generate the stable 1403 MCF-7 cell line (14). To generate transgenic mice, the hCLUp-Luc fragment (~3.4 kb) was excised using BamHI, purified by agarose gel electrophoresis and its sequence verified. Purified linear hCLUp-Luc (1 mug) was then submitted to the Case Western Reserve Transgenic Animal Facility, where it was microinjected into fertilized mouse 129/FVBN oocytes and ~300 fertilized oocytes were implanted into FVBN female mice. Tail clippings from offspring under three weeks of age were analyzed using PCR for the presence of 1403 hCLUp-Luc construct using the following primers: 5'-GCACAGCTATTCGTGGTGATG -3', and 5'-GCGTTGTGGGCACTGGGAG-3' located at positions -202 and -17 of humanclugene, respectively. The resulting 202 bp PCR products were sequenced, identifying humanclupromoter inserted into the mouse genome. Four pups (3 female, 1 male) positive for 1403 hCLUp-Luc were identified and used as breeding pairs for hCLUp-Luc transgenic FVBN mouse propagation. Southern blot analyses indicated an average of two (2) copies of the 1403 hCLUp-Luc in the genome of each transgenic mouse used for subsequent breeding. Male and female mice were analyzed, but female mice were investigated in more depth due to their higher hCLUp-luc activity induction in specific organs after IR exposure. Transgenic hCLUp-Luc reporter mice were treated with whole body gamma-irradiation (0.02 - 5 Gy) using a Shepard Mark Irradiator equipped with a137Cs source at dose rates: 3.88 Gy/min (for doses 0.5 Gy) or 0.42 Gy/min (for doses 0.5 Gy). Mice were also mock-irradiated (Untreated, UT) under the same conditions. Mice (minimum three/group) were then imaged using BLI (43). Briefly, male or female FVBN mice were anesthetized using isoflurane, hair was removed by mild shaving, and 2.5-3.0 mg D-luciferin was intraperitoneally (i.p.) administered. BLI images of mice were then captured 10-30 mins later using a liquid N2-cooled Xenogen Vivovision IVIS Lumina Imager for 30 sec to 2 mins. Cosmic radiation interference was eliminated using a correction algorithm developed for these studies as described above. After whole body imaging, mice were sacrificed and tissues extracted and imagedex vivousing BLI. Photomicrographs shown are representative of experiments performed at least three times with similar results. For time-course and dose-response BLIex vivoimaging studies, transgenic female (~18 gram) hCLUp-Luc reporter FVBN mice (3/group) were used, at least in duplicate, for each datum point. Reported are data from several different experiments performed at different times and doses and data compiled. Results were highly consistent within and between experiments, with a minimal n=6. More importantly, the results were consistent with western blot analyses of specific tissues (see below), indicating that expression signals from the human (hCLUp-Luc) reporter within mouse tissues responded in an identical manner to endogenous sCLU protein expression. In separate experiments, mice (3/group) were treated with whole body IR at doses of 0.02 or 1 Gy. Tissues (colon/small intestine, bone marrow, muscle, spleen, and lung) were then extracted 24 or 72 h later as indicated and immediately homogenized as described (43). Tissue homogenates were incubated on ice for 30 min, centrifuged (5,000 * g, 15 min, 4 degrees C) and protein samples diluted to a final concentration of 2 mug/ml. Extracts were combined from each of three mice per group. Proteins were then separated by 8-12% SDS-PAGE and steady state levels analyzed by Western blotting. Westerns shown are representative of three experiments with similar results. Cells were fixed with 1% formaldehyde, counterstained with propidium iodide (PI) and analyzed for cell cycle changes by FACS using a Coulter Epics XL flow cytometer (Beckman Coulter Electronics; Miami, Fl). Data were analyzed using ModFit LT, version 2.0 software (Verify Software House; Topsham, ME) (14,15). All experiments were independently performed at least three times in duplicate, unless otherwise indicated. Student's t tests and ANOVA power analyses were performed with the aid of Dr. Jin Xie, Biostatistics Core, Simmons Comprehensive Cancer Center.