Hace1 (HECT domain and ankyrin repeat containing E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase 1) is a HECT family E3 ligase that was first identified as a tumor suppressor in human Wilms' tumors, the most common kidney cancer in children (1,2). Recent studies demonstrated epigenetic inactivation of theHace1gene in multiple other human tumors (3-8). Hace1knockout mice develop spontaneous late onset tumors of diverse phenotypes, highlighting Hace1 as abona fidetumor suppressor (2). To date, the only known E3 ligase target of Hace1 is the small Rho-GTPase, Rac1 (9-10). In response to cytotoxic necrotizing factor-1 or hepatocyte growth factor, Hace1 ubiquitylates and targets GTP-bound (activated) Rac1 for proteosomal degradation to block Rac1-dependent bacterial invasion (9) and cell migration (10), respectively. Rac1 is involved in multiple regulatory processes, including reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation by NADPH oxidases, as GTP-bound Rac1 is an essential subunit for activation of Nox1-3-containing NADPH oxidases (11,12). We recently reported that loss of Hace1 in mice, zebra fish, human Wilms' tumor tissues, as well as in other human tumor cell lines, leads to increased cellular ROS levels due to high Rac1 activity, resulting in uncontrolled ROS production by Rac1-dependent NADPH oxidases (13). Furthermore, Hace1 indirectly promotes activity of nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (NRF2), a master regulator of the antioxidative stress response (14). Hace1 is therefore emerging as a key regulator of oxidative stress. Altered cellular metabolism is a well-known consequence of malignant transformation (15-18). In addition to glucose, glutamine (Gln) is a major nutrient source for tumor cellsin vitroandin vivo(19,20). Although not an essential amino acid, diverse cancer cell types depend on extracellular Gln for survival, a phenomenon known as Gln addiction (21). Oncogenes such as Myc and K-Ras depend on Gln for transformation and lead to upregulated Gln metabolism (22-24). Recent studies reported that the loss of the tumor suppressor retinoblastoma protein (pRB) is also associated with increased Gln metabolism and renders cells Gln addicted (25,26). While the Gln amine groups are used in the synthesis of most nonessential amino acids, the carbon skeleton of GLN is used to replenish tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle intermediates for bioATP production (27). In addition to supporting the TCA cycle, a significant fraction of Gln-derived carbon leaves the TCA cycle as malate and is converted to pyruvate by NADP+dependent malic enzyme (ME-1), thus producing NADPH for redox balance (28). Gln-derived glutamate is also directly used for synthesis of the anti-oxidant, glutathione (GSH) (27). Therefore Gln metabolism is crucial for cancer cells to maintain redox balance and to cope with the toxic effects of high ROS. Given that Hace1 deficiency leads to high cellular ROS, we wondered whether Hace1 loss is linked to altered Gln metabolism. Here we show thatHace1-/-MEFs are highly sensitive to Gln starvation compared towtcontrol MEFs. Hace1-/-MEFs exhibit increased Gln uptake and metabolism, and are dependent on Gln for soft agar colony formation. Gln deprivation induces cell death inHace1-/-MEFs by increasing cellular ROS levels. The antioxidant compound N-acetyl cysteine (NAC) or the TCA cycle intermediate oxaloacetate (OAA) efficiently rescues Gln starvation-induced ROS elevation and cell death. Moreover, reduction of superoxide production by inhibition of Rac1-dependent NADPH oxidases inHace1-/-MEFs reduces superoxide levels and cell death in the absence of Gln. These results indicate that inactivation of the Hace1 tumor suppressor leads to Gln addiction secondary to increased cellular ROS levels. To determine potential differences in glutamine starvation-induced cell death inHace1-/-versuswtMEFs, we stained cells with Hoechst or ethidium after 24 hours and 72 hours of Gln starvation and quantified the number of live and dead cells, respectively, using an IN Cell Analyzer. While live cell numbers actually increased inHace1 wtMEFs after 72 hours of Gln starvation (Fig. 1A), there was no increase in dead cell counts for this cell line over the same time period (Fig. 1B), indicating thatHace1 wtMEFs do not depend on Gln for growth or survival. In marked contrast, while live cell counts were unchanged, there was a significant increase in the dead cell count forHace1-/-MEFs after 72 hours of Gln starvation (Fig. 1A-C). We also compared growth rates ofwtandHace1-/-MEFs in the presence of glutamine. As shown inFig. 1D, growth ofHace1-/-MEFs is similar (24 hours after seeding) to or greater (48 hours after seeding) than that ofwtMEFs. These data indicate thatHace1-/-MEFs are not growth-deficient when Gln is present and the observed effects of Gln starvation onHace1-/-MEFs is due to the dependency of these cells on Gln. To support these findings, we also quantified cell death by propidium iodide (PI) incorporation into dead cells by flow cytometry. Consistent with the aforementioned results, Gln starvation induced significant cell death only inHace1-/-MEFs (Fig. 1E). These data establish that loss of Hace1 renders cells dependent on Gln for survival. SinceHace1-/-MEFs depend on Gln for survival, we predicted that these cells might have increased Gln uptake and metabolism compared to theirwtcounterparts. Using radioactively labeled glutamine (U-14C Gln), we measured Gln uptake and found thatHace1-/-MEFs take up significantly more Gln thanwtMEFs (Fig. 2A). We confirmed the effect of Hace1 expression on cellular Gln uptake in HEK293 cells stably expressing control or Hace1 specific shRNAs. HEK293 cells express high levels of Hace1 as compared to various human cancer cell lines and therefore they are considered as a good model system to study effects of Hace1 on cellular processes (13). HEK293 cells with stable Hace1 shRNA-mediated knockdown exhibited increased Gln uptake as compared with cells stably expressing control shRNAs (suppl. Fig. 1). Conversion of Gln to glutamate is the first step of Gln metabolism and is associated with ammonia production. Consistent with increased Gln uptake,Hace1-/-MEFs generate significantly higher levels of ammoniain vitro(Fig. 2B). Many transformed cell lines use Gln as the major anaplerotic precursor for synthesis of the TCA cycle intermediates (18,28,29). SinceHace1-/-MEFs uptake more Gln, we next investigated whether Gln is metabolized differently inHace1-/-versuswtMEFs. We therefore cultured cells in media containing [U-13C]-Gln and analyzed the incorporation of Gln carbons into the TCA cycle intermediates citrate, malate, and fumarate using mass spectrometry. Processing of [U-13C]-Gln in the TCA cycle generates M+4 isotopomers (Fig. 2C), whereas non-Gln sources (e.g. glucose) produce M+0 isotopomers (un-labeled) of these intermediates. We found that both cell lines efficiently incorporated Gln carbons into TCA cycle intermediates (Fig. 2D-F), suggesting that Hace1 loss does not cause a major change in the pathways by which these cells utilize Gln for anaplerosis. However,Hace1-/-MEFs displayed significantly higher levels of M+4 isotopomers of citrate, malate, and fumarate, indicating increased Gln metabolism. In contrast, levels of unlabeled intermediates (M+0 isotopomers) were higher inHace1 wtMEFs (Fig. 2G), suggesting a modest enhancement in the fraction of TCA cycle intermediate pools labeled by Gln inHace1-/-MEFs over this time course. This data implies that loss of Hace1 results in a slight shift towards Gln as a more favored anaplerotic precursor. We previously demonstrated that Hace1 loss leads to increased ROS levels bothin vitroandin vivo(13). Since Gln is a precursor for the synthesis of the antioxidant GSH, we investigated the possibility that Gln is required for survival ofHace1-/-MEFs by mitigating the toxic effects of increased ROS production. We compared ROS levels inHace1-/-andwtMEFs with or without Gln starvation using the general ROS indicator CM-H2DCFDA followed by flow cytometry. We found thatHace1-/-MEFs have significantly higher ROS compared towtMEFs, and that Gln starvation enhances ROS levels inHace1-/-but not inwtMEFs (Fig. 3A). Furthermore, Gln starvation caused a significant reduction in both NADPH and reduced GSH levels inHace1-/-MEFs (Figs. 3B and 3C). Of note, GSH levels were also slightly decreased inwtMEFs upon Gln starvation, but to a much lesser extend compared with the marked decrease observed inHace1-/-MEFs (Fig. 3C), suggesting that a severe depletion of reduced GSH pools is required for ROS elevation in these cells. These results provide strong evidence thatHace1-/-MEFs depend on Gln for ROS homeostatis. Accordingly, we predicted that glutamine starvation-induced cell death may be due to elevated ROS levels inHace1-/-MEFs and that a ROS scavenger, or a TCA cycle intermediate that can be converted to glutamate and eventually to GSH, could rescue cell death in the absence of Gln. Indeed, addition of the anaplerotic precursor oxaloacetate (OAA), which can be utilized by cells to derive glutamate and GSH, or the antioxidant N-acetyl cysteine (NAC), to the culture medium efficiently reduced Gln starvation-induced ROS elevation and cell death inHace1-/-MEFs (Fig. 3D, 3E). This strongly suggests that Gln starvation induces cell death in Hace1 deficient cells by augmenting cellular ROS levels. The pentose phosphate and ME-1 pathways are considered as the major NADPH generating mechanisms in cells (30,31). As mentioned earlier, ME-1 contributes to cellular NADPH pools by converting Gln-derived malate to pyruvate in an NADP+dependent manner, releasing NADPH as a side product (28). To address whether inhibition of ME-1 expression inwtMEFs can induce a similar effect to that of Gln starvation observed inHace1-/-MEFs, we knocked down ME-1 inwtMEFs using specific siRNAs and measured cell death in the presence or absence of Gln. ME-1 knock down increased the number of dead cells slightly but significantly in thewtMEFs under both glutamine replete and glutamine deplete conditions (suppl. Figure 2A). We confirmed successful knockdown of ME-1 by qRT-PCR analysis (suppl. Fig. 2B). A marked increase in cell death is not expected upon knockdown of ME-1 because cells likely compensate for the NADPH reduction caused by ME-1 loss by upregulating NADPH production from the pentose phosphate pathway. This may be the reason why knock down of ME-1 inwtMEFs is not as effective as Gln starvation in inducing cell death as seen withHace1-/-MEFs. Transformed cells feed Gln into the TCA cycle to maintain sufficient pools of biosynthetic precursors to support oncogenic processes (28). We therefore tested if Gln withdrawal could block the ability ofHace1-/-MEFs to form colonies in soft agar, a well-established read-out of transformation activity. As reported (13),Hace1-/-MEFs formed strikingly higher number of colonies thanwtMEFs in medium containing regular Gln levels, but this was completely inhibited in the absence of Gln (Fig. 3F). Addition of the anaplerotic molecule OAA in soft agar medium did not restore colony formation efficiency ofHace1-/-MEFs in the absence of Gln (Fig. 3F) despite its ability to rescue ROS elevation and cell death under these conditions. This is expected because in addition to its role as an anaplerotic precursor for biosynthesis of TCA cycle intermediates and GSH, Gln is also directly utilized for hexosamine and nucleotide biosynthesis, which are essential for proliferation (32,33). Thus,Hace1-/-MEFs are reliant on Gln for transformation activity. We next evaluated chemical inhibitors of cellular Gln uptake to assess the potential use of pharmacologic depletion of Gln to inhibit growth of Hace1 deficient tumors. Two such inhibitors are sodium phenylacetate (NaPA) and gamma-L-glutamyl-p-nitroanilide hydrochloride (GPNA). NaPA is known to block tumor growthin vivoby depleting Gln in the circulation (34), and can block growth of cancer cellsin vitro(35), although the mechanism for the latter is not clear. GPNA is an inhibitor of the Gln transporter ASCT2 and therefore reduces cellular Gln uptake (36). NaPA and GPNA both very effectively blocked soft agar colony formation ofHace1-/-MEFs (Fig. 3G). Together, these results suggest thatHace1-/-MEFs take up and metabolize more Gln and are dependent on Gln for ROS homeostasis, survival, and cellular transformation, providing preliminary evidence that Gln depletion may be an effective strategy to block growth of Hace1 deficient tumors. To confirm that increased superoxide generation by NADPH oxidase complexes is the source of ROS augmentation and cell death inHace1-/-MEFs after Gln withdrawal, we first analyzed superoxide levels inHace1-/-andwtMEFs with or without Gln starvation, using the superoxide specific dye dihydroethidum (DHE). As previously observed (13),Hace1-/-MEFs had significantly higher superoxide levels compared towtMEFs (Figs. 4A and 4B). Gln starvation only modestly increased superoxide levels in Hace1wtMEFs, whereas it caused a dramatic increase inHace1-/-MEFs (Fig. 4A, 4B). Blocking NADPH oxidase activity using the NOX1-containing NADPH oxidase inhibitor ML171 (37) completely abrogated Gln starvation-induced superoxide production (Figs. 4C and 4D), and significantly reduced Gln starvation-induced cell death inHace1-/-MEFs (Fig. 4E). It should be noted that the rescue effect of ML171 treatment on cell viability in the absence of Gln was not as striking as its ability to abrogate superoxide levels inHace1-/-MEFs, indicating that other sources of ROS may also contribute to Gln starvation-induced cell death. These results strongly argue that Hace1 deficiency leads to increased superoxide generation by NADPH oxidases, and suggest that Hace1 deficient cells may depend on Gln to cope with increased cellular ROS levels to avoid ROS-induced cell death. In summary, our data indicate that Hace1 deficient cells become addicted to Gln to adapt to the increased oxidative stress characteristic of these cells (13). In the absence of Gln, ROS levels are further enhanced, resulting in potentially toxic levels of oxidative stress and cell death. These results provide preliminary evidence that blocking Gln uptake or metabolism may represent a tractable therapeutic strategy for treatment of cancers in which Hace1 is inactivated.