A fundamental requirement of the primate visual system is the building of higher-order representations of spatially extensive textures, surfaces and objects from the initial feature/filter code in primary visual cortex. One step towards this goal is to extend the principle of neuronal convergence found in the retina and lateral geniculate nucleus to visual cortex (Olzak Thomas 1999). In this way, area summation of luminance contrast can be achieved by summing the outputs of multiple local filters (e.g. striate cells). In fact, a substantial body of work has found that detection thresholds decrease with the area of a sine-wave grating, providing good evidence for an area summation process of some kind (e.g. Howell Hess 1978;Robson Graham 1981;RovamoNone. 1993;Meese 2004;FoleyNone. 2007). But does area summation involve the signal combination process described above? A computationally distinct alternative is 'probability summation' (PS), where the greater the number of detectors stimulated, the greater the probability that the stimulus will be detected. The PS nomenclature pertains to earlier psychophysical work built around a high threshold model of the detection process (e.g. SachsNone. 1971;Robson Graham 1981). This model assumes a formal relation between per cent correct (the psychometric function) and the probability that the stimulus strength exceeded detection threshold (an output nonlinearity). From this it follows that the benefit from PS between independent detectors depends on the slope of the psychometric function (Quick 1974). More generally, a convenient expression for summation in a variety of situations is Minkowski summation:None, where respNoneis the contrast response of theith mechanism andm(sometimes called the Minkowski exponent) controls the level of summation (which decreases asmincreases). FromQuick (1974)it follows that if the psychometric function is a Weibull function, then its slope parameter (beta) equals the Minkowski exponent (m) when the relation between respNoneand stimulus strength (e.g. contrast) is linear and summation is PS. When respNoneis constant acrossi, a property of Minkowski summation is that:m'=-1/m, wherem' is the log-log threshold slope against the number of detecting mechanisms,n. Empirical estimates of the psychometric slope are typicallyNoneat detection threshold (e.g. Mayer Tyler 1986), and area summation is quite gentle beyond a few cycles of grating:m'?-1/3 to -1/4 (Robson Graham 1981). This close empirical relation between Minkowski exponent (m) and psychometric slope (None;Watson 1979;Meese Williams 2000) has been taken as evidence that area summation of contrast arises through PS (Robson Graham 1981). However, as high threshold theory is discredited (e.g. Nachmias 1981), the theoretical basis for a Minkowski implementation of PS is undermined. A contemporary signal detection framework for PS was developed byTyler Chen (2000). They built their analysis around the two-interval forced-choice (2IFC) design of psychophysical experiments and assumed a linear contrast transducer for simplicity. The observer is assumed to select the interval containing the mechanism with the largest (MAX) response. This analysis found thatm'?-1/4 in several situations (sometimes called a fourth-root rule), justifying the use ofm=4 in Minkowski summation, but in generalm? betain this framework. In spite of the empirical success of the fourth-root rule and its association with PS, a signal combination framework remains viable. We develop this inS3aandappendix A. Although contrast sensitivity improves with grating area around detection threshold, empirical summation is diminished or abolished above threshold (Legge Foley 1980;NasanenNone. 1998;McIlhagga Paakkonen 1999;Meese 2004;Chirimuuta Tolhurst 2005;MeeseNone. 2005), suggesting that the integration process is made inoperative (e.g. Legge Foley 1980;SwansonNone. 1984). This also fuelled support for the idea that summation at threshold is due to PS (rather than signal combination), because it was much easier to see a method by which this type of summation could be disabled; if noise were to become correlated above threshold, there would be no benefit in having multiple detecting mechanisms (Legge Foley 1980). However, another possibility is that the benefits of the area summation process are offset by an equal and opposite effect of suppression that increases with the size of the pedestal (Bonneh Sagi 1999;MeeseNone. 2005). With this in mind,Meese (2004)attempted to isolate the summing process by investigating different combinations of small (S) and large (L) target and pedestal diameters. For two out of three observers, the masking functions for all three target/pedestal configurations (SS, SL and LL) converged at high pedestal contrasts, confirming that area summation does not operate unhindered well above threshold. The modelling accommodated this by a process of suprathreshold suppression, but the failure to produce a compelling empirical illustration of suprathreshold summation leaves the status of the summation process unresolved. Our main aim here was to devise novel stimulus conditions that would reveal the putative excitatory summation process empirically. The SL and LL conditions ofMeese (2004)were an improvement on earlier comparisons between SS and LL because the pedestal size was not confounded with target size. However, the spatial extent of excitatory integration probably differed across the two conditions (Meese 2004). To avoid this complication, it is preferable that the target size is varied within a fixed region of putative integration in an attempt to tap a common mechanism or process. We take up this challenge here by designing a stimulus class that appears to meet this requirement. A second issue is that the analysis inMeese (2004)did not address whether the underlying process was one of PS or signal combination. We develop a model of signal combination in experiments 1 and 2, and reject the PS model in experiment 2 by extending the analysis to include the slope of the psychometric function (Tyler Chen 2000). Stimuli were displayed from the framestores of Cambridge Research Systems (CRS) stimulus generators operating in pseudo 14- or 15-bit mode and controlled by a P. C. The monitors were a Sony Multiscan 20SEII for experiment 1, and either an Eizo Flex scan F553-M or a Clinton Monoray (observers Y. R. and A. S. P.) for experiments 2 and 3. Mean luminance was 61 cd m-2for the Sony and 50 cd m-2for the Eizo and Clinton (The Clinton was viewed through CRS ferro-electric (FE-1) shutter goggles which remained open on all frames for both eyes). All three monitors had a frame rate of 120 Hz. In experiments 2 and 3 the image refresh rate was 60 Hz. Look up tables were used to perform gamma correction to ensure linearity over the full range of stimulus contrasts. Observers sat at a viewing distance of 72.5 cm in experiment 1 and 51.5 cm in experiments 2 and 3, with their head in a chin and headrest, and viewed the stimuli binocularly. The three different types of stimuli used in experiments 2 and 3 are shown infigure 1. The full stimulus (figure 1a) was a horizontal sine-wave grating in sine-phase with the centre of the display, and had a spatial frequency of 2.5 cycles per degree. It was modulated by a circular raised cosine function with a central plateau of 8 degrees and a blurred boundary of 1 degrees , giving a full-width at half-height of 9 degrees . The check stimuli (figure 1b,c) were identical to the full stimulus, except that they were modulated by a 'raised-plaid' envelope. The plaid was the sum of two sine-wave grating components with orientations of +/-45 degrees and a spatial frequency of 0.5 cycles per degree, each with contrasts of 0.5. This gave minima and maxima of -1 and 1, respectively. The envelope was then 'raised' by adding 1 to each point and dividing by 2 to give minima and maxima of 0 and 1. With this arrangement, there are 7.07 cycles of carrier grating for every two checks (i.e. one cycle of a vertical cross-section through the envelope). Infigure 1bthe modulator is in cosine-phase with the centre of the display and infigure 1cit is in -cosine phase. These stimuli are given the nominal titles of 'white' and 'black' checks, respectively (a reference to the magnitude of the modulator at the centre of the display). Note that the physical sum of the stimuli infigure 1b,cis equal to the full stimulus infigure 1a. In experiment 1 the stimuli were full stimuli and 'white' check stimuli. However, they differed from those infigure 1in three ways: the carrier grating was oriented vertically; the blurring of the edges extended over only 2 pixels (4.8 arcmin); and their diameter varied across conditions. There were eight different sizes of the full stimulus and four different sizes of the check stimulus. The smallest stimulus had a full diameter of 14 pixels (10 for the central plateau of one cycle, plus two on each side for the blurred boundary). The full set of stimuli is provided in electronic supplementary material 3. In experiments 2 and 3 a dark square fixation point (4.8 arcmin wide) was displayed in the centre of the display throughout the experiment. In experiment 1 no fixation point was used. In all experiments, carrier contrast is expressed as Michelson contrast in percentage (i.e. c=100((Lmax-Lmin)/(Lmax-Lmin))) or, for consistency with previous work, in dB re 1% (=20 log10(c)). There were four possible combinations of target on pedestal: (i) full-on-full, (ii) 'black' checks-on-full, (iii) 'white' checks-on-full, and (iv) 'white' checks-on-checks. In experiments 1 and 2, target contrast was selected by a staircase procedure. Three consecutive correct responses and a single incorrect response caused the stimulus level to be incremented and decremented by a single contrast 'step', respectively (Wetherill Levitt 1965). Each condition was tested using a pair of randomly interleaved staircases. The target contrast always began well above detection threshold and each staircase terminated after 12 reversals with a step-size of 3 dB. A temporal 2IFC technique was used. In most conditions, one interval contained only the pedestal and the other the pedestal plus target. In experiment 1, the pedestal contrast was 0%. In all experiments, the onset of each 100 ms stimulus interval was indicated by an auditory tone and the duration between the two intervals was 400 ms. The observer's task was to identify the target interval using one of two buttons to indicate their response. Correctness of response was provided by auditory feedback, and the computer selected the order of the intervals randomly. For each run, data were collapsed across the two staircases and thresholds (75% correct) and standard errors were estimated by probit analysis. Each condition was run four times. In all experiments, stimulus conditions were blocked and observers were aware of which stimulus was being used as the target. The order of conditions was random. In experiment 3 a method of constant stimuli was used (120 trials per level). Pedestal contrasts were either 0 or 20% in different runs. A preliminary detection experiment determined sensitivity (75% correct) to full and 'white' check increments. In a subsequent 2IFC identification task, one interval contained a full increment and the other contained an equally detectable 'white' check increment. The observers' task was to select the interval containing the 'white' check increment. An author (T.S.M.) was the only observer to perform experiment 1. Seven undergraduate optometry students performed experiment 2 (the main experiment) as part of their course requirement. They were D.B.D, P.C, C.M., L.M., L.W., Y.R. and A.S. P. Of these, only L.M. and L.W. performed all four conditions. Both authors (T.S.M. and R.J.S.) performed experiment 3. All observers wore their normal optical correction and had normal stereopsis. The filled circles infigure 2show area summation for the full stimulus, which is a bowed function of stimulus area. The initial part of the function approximates a slope ofm'=-1/2 on these double-log coordinates. The intermediate region is shallower and approximates a slope ofm'=-1/4, but becomes asymptotic thereafter. This general form is similar to that found in previous studies, where area summation has been measured in the central visual field (Tootle Berkley 1983;Garcia-Perez 1988;RovamoNone. 1993;FoleyNone. 2007). The thick continuous and dashed curves infigure 2are model predictions. The model is described formally inappendix A, but in brief, it operates as follows. The image is multiplied by an attenuation surface to simulate the effects of retinal inhomogeneity and convolved with sine- and cosine-phase filters matched to the spatial frequency and orientation of the carrier (see inset for sine-phase example). The response at each pixel is full-wave rectified and passed through an accelerating contrast transducer with an exponentp=2.4 (Legge Foley 1980). Added to the output at each pixel is zero-mean, unit variance, Gaussian noise. This is followed by linear summation of the filtered signal and noise across the target region and to determine sensitivity. The model is deterministic and establishes the influence of multiple independent noise sources by combining their (unit) variances in the conventional way. Thus, the standard deviation of the noise? None, wherenis the number of pixels in the target. The signal contrast is set to produce unit SNR for each target and is normalized to the detection threshold for the smallest target. Although summation extends over the full extent of the largest stimulus in the model (50 carrier cycles), detection thresholds improve little beyond eight cycles. In the model, this is due to the effect of retinal inhomogeneity. Of more importance here is the substantial improvement (approx. 5 dB) across the two stimulus types (different symbols). In the model, this is because noise and retinal sensitivity are constant across the two stimulus types, but spatial summation of contrast results in much greater sensitivity to the full stimulus (filled circles). These model assumptions suppose that the visual system cannot switch out the less informative contributions in the low-contrast signal regions of the check stimuli where noise is dominant. The close proximity between model and data suggests that this is reasonable. These results emphasize the difference between a conventional summation experiment, where area increases with stimulus diameter (abscissa), and the new approach here, where the diameter is constant and the area is increased by filling in the low-contrast (black) patches of the stimulus (different symbols). Note that 'filling-in' increases the stimulus area (the sum of contrast over area) by a factor of 2, equivalent to a single tick mark along the abscissa for the conventional method (filled circles). However, the conventional method never achieves a level of summation comparable with that obtained using the filling-in method. In part, this is presumably because the conventional method confounds noise level and retinal sensitivity with area. In experiment 2 we replicated the key result from experiment 1 (comparison across check and full stimuli) for seven other observers and extended the study above threshold. The results are shown infigure 3aand averaged across the two observers who performed all of the conditions (L. M. and L. W.). The filled circles are for when the full stimulus (figure 1a) was used as both pedestal and target and have a classic 'dipper' shape. The crossed squares are for when the 'white' checks stimulus was used as both the pedestal and the target. Although the two stimulus types have the same diameters (figure 1), the sum of contrast over area for the full stimulus is twice that of the check stimuli. Hence, we refer to the full stimulus as having a greater (signal) area than the check stimulus of corresponding size. A comparison of these two conditions replicates the classic area summation result ofLegge Foley (1980): at low pedestal contrasts there is a distinct advantage for the full stimulus, which has the greater area, but at higher pedestal contrasts the two masking functions converge. The half-filled squares are for when the target was one of the check stimuli (figure 1b,c), but the pedestal was the full stimulus. (The results were almost identical for 'black' and 'white' checks-as confirmed infigure 4abelow-and have been averaged together.) A comparison of this with the full-on-full condition (compare circles and half-filled squares) shows the effect of fixing the pedestal area and increasing only the target area. In this case, the area advantage at detection threshold extends across the entire dipper function, providing strong evidence for a spatial summation process that remains intact across a wide range of contrasts. Our threshold model (from experiment 1) was extended to operate across the full contrast range and provides a very good account of the general form of these three functions (figure 3b). It sums stimulus contrast (both pedestal and target) over area on the numerator and denominator of a contrast gain control equation,NoneNonewhere mechNoneis the full-wave rectified contrast response of theith filter element (mechanism) in the stimulus region after retinal inhomogeneity (seeappendix Bfor details). It is well known that this general form of equation produces a dipper function (Legge Foley 1980;Meese 2004). Furthermore, the saturation constant,z, ensures an area advantage at threshold because an increase in signal area impacts substantially only on the numerator. Above threshold, when the area of both target and pedestal is increased (crossed squares versus filled circles), the pedestal and target impact both the numerator and denominator and the masking functions converge (MeeseNone. 2005). In contrast, when the pedestal area is fixed and only the target area grows (half-filled squares versus filled circles), the impact is most effective on the numerator, and area summation occurs for all pedestal contrasts. The model (equation(3.1)) implements a blanket pooling strategy consistent with the main aim of our stimulus design (seeS1c). The importance of this is shown infigure 3cwhere excitatory pooling has been restricted to the high-contrast regions of the checks (i.e. 'white' half of the image) in the checks-on-full condition (half-shaded squares). This is comparable with the restricted excitatory pooling for the SL condition inMeese (2004). In both studies this pooling strategy has the same effect: all three masking functions tend towards convergence. However, this is not consistent with the data here (figure 3a), suggesting that observers could not restrict excitatory integration in this way. The extra masking infigure 3b(compare half-shaded squares acrossfigure 3b,c) is due to the mandatory excitatory integration over the non-target regions. We refer to this asdilution masking. Figure 4ashows the results averaged across a total of six observers (L.M. and L.W. from before, plus D.B. D, P.C., C.M. and A.S.P. ), where the pedestal was always a full stimulus (see electronic supplementary material 2 for individual datasets). As mentioned above, the results for the 'black' and 'white' checks were almost identical (different square symbols), as were model predictions for these two conditions (not shown). Figure 4bshows the level of summation as a function of pedestal contrast derived from the ratios of the full condition and the average check condition infigure 4a. The thick dashed curve is the model prediction derived in the same way (no further free parameters). Note that for model and data, the level of summation increases slightly (by approx. 1 dB) over the first part of the function, but then asymptotes around 6 dB (a factor of 2) at higher contrasts. Thus, the level of summation is substantial across the entire contrast range for the model and these six observers. The results for Y.R were slightly different. Although her levels of summation were similar to the others at the lower pedestal contrasts, they fell to approximately 3 dB at the higher contrasts. It is not clear why this occurred but it could be due to the use of less or more efficient pooling strategies for the full and check targets, respectively (see above). In the next experiment, the results for R.J.S. (but not T.S.M.) also show less than typical area summation above threshold. Our main proposal is that the full and check stimuli are detected by a common pooling process (e.g. equation(3.1)). Subjective reports of our observers (who were questioned during the experiment) are consistent with this view: when the checks-on-full stimulus was close to threshold, the target increment appeared to be applied to the entire pedestal. If so, it should be difficult for the observers to identify a check target in a 2IFC experiment, where equally detectable check and full increments are placed in the two intervals. An alternative hypothesis is that the different increments are detected by different mechanisms. For example, the check stimulus might be detected by a second-order mechanism sensitive to contrast modulation (Georgeson Schofield 2002). If these involve labelled lines (Watson Robson 1981), then observers should be able to identify the different increment types close to their thresholds (Georgeson Schofield 2002). Figure 5shows that this does not happen for pedestal contrasts of either 0% (figure 5a(i),b(i)) or 20% (figure 5a(ii),b(ii)). On these normalized axes, the psychometric functions for detecting the two different increment types (squares and circles) superimpose (i.e. the results for the checks condition were slid laterally). In the identification task (crosses), equally detectable full and 'white' check contrast increments were made in the two test intervals and observers had to identify the checks. But the contrast increment needed to do this successfully was much higher than for detection. Although this experiment does not identify the form of pooling (PS or signal combination), it does suggest that a common pooling process was used to detect the two different targets. For simplicity, contrast was summed over the entire stimulus region in the modelling in figures3band4b, but the question arises, what is the smallest region over which summation is required? Figure 6shows the results of rerunning the model on the full-on-full stimulus and the 'white' checks-on-full stimulus for a pedestal contrast of 32% (30 dB), and varying the diameter of a circular (hard-edged) summation aperture at their centres. The figure plots the ratio of target increment thresholds for these two stimuli (i.e. summation). The main model (equation(3.1), filled diamonds) must sum over at least seven carrier cycles (vertical solid line; a diameter of two checks) before it reaches the level of summation shown by the six observers infigure 3(horizontal solid line). A pragmatic framework that has been widely used in models of suprathreshold tasks is Minkowski pooling over the response differences of multiple mechanisms (Wilson Gelb 1984). The response of each mechanism has the typical form: respNone=mechNone(stim)2.4/(z+mechNone(stim)2). But when the analysis is restricted to conditions well above detection threshold, this reduces to: respNone=mechNone(stim)0.4. In this case Minkowski pooling of response differences is given byNoneNoneEquation(3.2)was solved numerically for target contrast where Minkowski_sum( )=1, following retinal inhomogeneity and spatial filtering as before. Withm=1, this model behaved in a very similar way to the main model (equation(3.1)) for the stimulus pair here (compare open and filled diamonds infigure 6). Withm=2 (open triangles), the model reached human summation when pooling extended over 8 carrier cycles, but withm=4 (filled triangles) the model could not reach this level at any spatial extent. Further simulations (not shown) confirmed that this conclusion was not critically dependent on the compressive response exponent of 0.4. Thus, a fourth-root summation rule on response differences will not do for the contrast discrimination experiments here. 1A Minkowski exponent (m) of 4 is often justified by appealing to its close approximation to PS at detection threshold (Meese Williams 2000). However, the fourth-root rule does not have general theoretical support (Tyler Chen 2000) and if area summation by PS is to be addressed, more detailed treatment is needed. Tyler Chen showed that when the number of excited mechanisms doubles to fill the attention window (the array of mechanisms monitored by the observer), then PS produces high levels of summation, close tom=2. To provide a direct test of whether PS could account for the summation found with our stimuli (full-on-full versus checks-on-full) under these 'high summation' conditions, we performed Monte Carlo simulations (appendix C). With a pedestal contrast of 0%, these showed that 5 dB of summation is attainable for our stimuli using a MAX operator, a linear transducer and an attention window that matches the full stimulus. However, this model also predicts a shallow psychometric function (Weibullbeta?1.3), whereas the geometric means ofNonefor the seven observers infigure 4bwereNone(N=52) andNone(N=28), for the check and full stimuli, respectively. The slope of the model psychometric function can be made steeper by increasing uncertainty (the number of mechanisms contributing to the MAX operation), but this moves PS away from the high summation region (Tyler Chen 2000). Another method is to introduce an accelerating contrast transducer. UsingC2.4(the contrast transducer of our model), the model psychometric slopes increased tobeta?4 andbeta?3 for the check and full stimuli, respectively. However, the level of summation dropped to 3.48 dB; significantly less than the 5.06 dB found in the experiment (T=4.69;p=0.003, d.f.=6; two-tailed). A long-standing view of spatial vision is that (i) spatial summation of luminance contrast in the central visual field is due to PS among independent mechanisms and (ii) this summation process is disabled above threshold. Both parts of this view are challenged by the work here. In a preliminary experiment we demonstrated that bowed spatial summation curves are consistent with a signal combination strategy over many grating cycles. Experiment 2 showed that spatial summation of contrast occurs both at and above detection threshold over at least seven carrier cycles. Experiment 3 supported the idea that our different targets tapped a common pooling process. Finally, we rejected a fourth-root rule (figure 6) and PS model of area summation (appendix C), leaving signal combination as the most likely candidate. The combination of a contrast transducer ofNoneand area summation of signal and noise (appendix A) predicts the same area summation at threshold as linear summation following a contrast transducer ofNoneand late additive noise (e.g. seeFoleyNone. 2007). This is also the same as Minkowski summation over a contrast transducerNoneand a Minkowski exponentm=2p/p', seeS1a. Thus, when combined with the spatial filtering and retinal inhomogeneity outlined inappendix A, all three of these formulations produce the spatial summation shown by the thick solid curve infigure 2(where 2p=4.8). However, these formulations do not generally make the same prediction for the slope of the psychometric function (beta). From signal detection theory the slope of thed' psychometric function is equal to the overall contrast response exponent,phi. Conversion to Weibull units givesbeta=1.3*phi(Tyler Chen 2000), wherephi=p, 2porp' in the three formulations above. The average value of the psychometric slope for the full stimuli in the three experiments here wasNone, which is close tobeta=3.1 predicted by the first formulation. It is very different frombeta=6.2 predicted by the second formulation, suggesting that this arrangement is unlikely. The third formulation is usually used with a linear transducer giving:p'=1,m=4.8 andbeta=1.3. In this casebetais far too low. Thus, a Minkowski formulation with a linear transducer is inadequate. By settingbeta=3.1 to match that predicted by our preferred formulation, we find a transducerp'=2.4 and Minkowski exponentm=2. This formulation slightly underestimates summation at threshold (thin curve infigure 2), but is plausible above threshold (figure 6) and might be a useful alternative to the main model here. However, it would need to be developed to include lateral interactions to handle the relation between the SS, SL and LL configurations ofMeese (2004)and the checks-on-checks versus full-on-full comparison here (figure 3a). Human performance was very well described here using equation(3.1). But how might this equation be expressed in the human brain? One possibility is that the elements of a spatial array of first-order mechanisms with contrast responses ? C2.4are summed by a higher-order contrast integrator that is suppressed by an overlapping spatial array of mechanisms with contrast responses ? C2.0. Another possibility is that each element in the spatial array has contrast response ? C2.4and is inhibited by a signal pooled across the spatial array of mechanisms having responses ? C2.0. This would produce first-order mechanisms with self-inhibition (Foley 1994), lateral inhibition (Snowden Hammett 1998) and sigmoidal contrast responses (Legge Foley 1980). Summing across the array would produce a higher-order contrast integrator consistent with equation(3.1). Furthermore, placing the limiting source of additive noise after the inhibition but before the final summation stage is consistent with our suggestion that noise is summed over area (appendix A), but that it can be treated as late (i.e. it is not suppressed along with the signal) in experiment 2 (seeappendix B). There is evidence for both types of convergence described above. Numerous studies have found suppression from the ends, flanks and entire surrounds of the first-order filters using psychophysical (Ejima Takahashi 1985;Cannon Fullenkamp 1991;Xing Heeger 2000;Chen Tyler 2001;Meese 2004;PetrovNone. 2005) and neurophysiological methods (Gilbert Wiesel 1985;Born Tootell 1991;DeAngelisNone. 1994). There is also single-cell evidence for spatial pooling over large retinal fields. Gilbert Wiesel (1985)andDeAngelisNone. (1994)reported extensive spatial integration of contrast across bar length in layer 6 of V1 andvon der HeydtNone. (1992)described a specialized class of cells in V1 and V2 that respond to periodic stimuli with several cycles. PollenNone. (2002)found spatial summation up to 16 cycles of length and width in V4 for sine-wave gratings, though the form of summation (e.g. linear, quadratic, MAX rule) probably varies among cells (GustavsenNone. 2004). Other work has found spatial mechanisms with large receptive fields that pool over more complex patterns, such as hyperbolic, radiating and concentric grating patterns (GallantNone. 1993;DavidNone. 2006). And psychophysical work has found evidence for mechanisms that sum structural (FieldNone. 1993;Wilson Wilkinson 1998;Dakin 2001;ParkesNone. 2001;Meese Holmes 2004;Motoyoshi Nashida 2004;Kuai Yu 2006) and motion information (MorroneNone. 1995) over large areas of the retina. However, one problem remains with the scheme above, which supposes lateral suppression across the full range of target contrasts. Experiments using annular masks have found little (PetrovNone. 2005) or no (Snowden Hammett 1998) lateral suppression in the fovea at detection threshold, yet suprathreshold influences from contrast in the surround are found in matching (Cannon Fullenkamp 1991) and discrimination experiments (Foley 1994;Chen Tyler 2001;Meese 2004;Tolhurst 2007). Our experiments here do not address this issue, but the answer might be that sophisticated psychophysical observers use different mechanisms in the various tasks and conditions that pertain to tap the same processes. Another possibility is that lateral suppression might arise after the limiting noise, in which case perceived contrast would be affected but not contrast detection thresholds (Solomon Morgan 2006). However, this would not explain the effects of surround contrast on contrast discrimination (Foley 1994;Meese 2004). A further possibility is that lateral suppression might be implemented by modulation of self-suppression by the surround (Foley 1994;MeeseNone. 2007). As self-suppression is negligible when the pedestal contrast is 0, we should not expect an annular mask to raise detection thresholds for a central target on this model. Further experiments are needed to clarify these issues. Other details of the process here remain to be elucidated. For example, future work is needed to determine whether there are similar mechanisms selective for more complex patterns (GallantNone. 1993;Wilson Wilkinson 1998;Dakin Bex 2001;Motoyoshi Nashida 2004;DavidNone. 2006;Tyler Chen 2006). Alternatively, the pooling here might be an instantiation of a more flexible process capable of responding to a wide range of stimuli (e.g. FieldNone. 1993;Meese Georgeson 2005), perhaps matching to particular objects, features or other image characteristics. In particular, work is needed to understand what controls the spatial extent of summation, which can be restricted to a single central disc (Meese 2004), but not the check regions here (figure 3c). In any case, it is now clear that spatial pooling of luminance contrast is much more pervasive than once thought, and that its behaviour is predicted by extending the footprint of a contrast gain control equation over several hypercolumns.