The multidrug resistance protein 2 (MRP2), encoded byABCC2, is a member of the ATP-binding cassette (ABC) family of membrane transporters. MRP2 is predominantly expressed in the canalicular membrane of hepatocytes, but can also be detected in the apical membranes of renal proximal tubule and intestinal epithelial cells. None,NoneMRP2 plays an important role in the pharmacokinetics of a wide variety of compounds. This transporter drives energy dependent efflux of organic anions, often conjugated to glutathione (GSH), glucuronic acid or sulfate, into the bile or urine for elimination. It can also transport neutral or basic compounds, but requires GSH for co-transport. None,NoneMRP2 substrates include endogenous compounds such as GSH, leukotriene C4,17beta-D-estradiol glucuronide and the heme metabolite bilirubin glucuronide as well as xenobiotics such as the HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor pravastatin, and the anti-cancer drugs irinotecan and its glucuronide metabolite SN-38 glucuronide, cisplatin and methotrexate. None,NoneThe importance of MRP2 mediated transport has been clearly demonstrated in mutant rat models lacking Mrp2 expressionNoneand in Dubin-Johnson syndrome patients with a hereditary deficiency of MRP2 caused by rare mutations in the coding region ofABCC2. None-NoneAlso, a number of commonABCC2non-synonymous polymorphisms have been associated with alterations in ABCC2 mRNA expression and/or MRP2 functionNone-Noneas well as with drug toxicities. None-NoneThe functional effects ofABCC2coding region and promoter polymorphisms remain controversial. In particular, the mechanisms by which promoter and synonymous polymorphisms influence MRP2 expression are unclear. Currently, there is limited information about transcriptional regulation of humanABCC2. Several studies have characterized a region between 197 and 517 bases upstream from the translation start site with important basal promoter activity. None-NoneThis region contains consensus sequences for a number of transcription factors, including the TATA box, the liver abundant CCAAT-enhancer binding protein and HNF1/4. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the promoter region may alter transcriptional activity and contribute to interindividual variability in MRP2 expression and the pharmacokinetics of MRP2 substrates. To date, a number of SNPs have been associated with the pharmacokinetics, efficacy and toxicity of MRP2 substrates, although most findings have not been replicatedNone-None. For example, theABCC2-24C greater than T polymorphism has been shown to decrease,None,None-NoneincreaseNoneas well as have no effect on ABCC2 expression. None-NoneInterestingly, theABCC2synonymous variant 3972C greater than T, which is in linkage disequilibrium with a number of promoter region polymorphisms, was associated with exposure to irinotecan and its metabolite SN-38 glucuronide. None,NonePatients who were homozygous for the 3972T allele had higher AUCs for irinotecan and SN-38 glucuronide compared to the combined group of patients having the CT or CC genotype. The higher AUC is consistent with decreased activity and/or expression of MRP2. In contrast, other studies have shown no effect of this polymorphism on ABCC2 expression and MRP2 function. None,None,None-NoneThe current study represents a comprehensive functional analysis of genetic variants in the promoter region ofABCC2. Based on the reported associations ofABCC23972C greater than T with various phenotypesNone,None,None, allele specific expression was also investigated as a possible mechanism conferring functional significance for this synonymous SNP. Two hundred human liver samples were provided by the Liver Tissue Procurement and Distribution System NIH Contract #N01-DK-9-2310 and by the Cooperative Human Tissue Network and were processed through Dr. Mary Relling's laboratory at St. Jude Children's Research Hospital (Memphis, TN); these liver samples were genotyped and used for ABCC2 allele specific expression experiments. Additional kidney (n=56) and liver (n=34) samples were provided by the Pharmacogenetics of Membrane Transporters tissue repository at the University of California San Francisco and were used to correlateABCC23972C greater than T genotype with total ABCC2 mRNA expression. A collection of 247 ethnically diverse genomic DNA samples were obtained from the Coriell Institute of Medical Research (http://coriell.umdnj.edu). This collection of samples was used to screen for genetic variations in a 1.6 kb upstream region ofABCC2. Initial screening was done using PCR, denaturing HPLC and direct sequencing as previously described. NoneA 1.6 kb region upstream of theABCC2translation start site was PCR amplified from genomic DNA and subcloned into pCR2.1 using the standard protocol from the TOPO TA cloning kit (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). The amplified promoter DNA was digested withNheIandXhoI(New England Biolabs, Beverly, MA) and was cloned into the reporter gene expression vector pGL4.11b (Promega, Madison, WI), which contains a luciferase gene downstream from the multiple cloning site. Compared to the earlier generationpGL3vectors, thepGL4vectors are engineered with fewer consensus regulatory sequences and a synthetic gene which has been codon optimized for mammalian expression. Individual non-singleton variants or variants in haplotypes were introduced using specific primers (Supplemental Table 1) and the QuickChange site-directed mutagenesis kit (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA). Plasmids were sequenced to verify the correct introduction of variants and were isolated as endotoxin-free preparations, a step that has been shown to eliminate purity bias and to significantly improve interassay variability. HepG2 cells were maintained in Dulbecco's Modified Eagle's medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS). A day prior to transfection cells were counted and seeded on 96 well plates at a density of 5 * 104cells per well. pGL4.11b empty vector or plasmids containing either reference or variant sequences were transiently transfected together withRenillaluciferase vector into HepG2 cells using the Lipofectamine 2000 reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). Renillaluciferase vector served as a transfection efficiency control. Cells were incubated for 24 hours at 37 degrees C in humidified atmosphere with 5% CO2,after which they were washed with phosphate buffered saline and incubated with 80 muL of passive lysis buffer (Promega, Madison, WI) at room temperature on a shaker for 30 min. Aliquots were analyzed for luciferase activity in a dual luciferase reporter assay on a GloMaxTM96 luminometer (Promega, Madison,WI) according to the manufacturer's instructions. The activities ofFireflyandRenillaluciferases were measured sequentially from each sample and both reporters yield linear assays with subattomole ( less than 10-18) sensitivities and no endogenous activity in the host cells. Genomic DNA was genotyped using a 5'-nuclease assayNoneand direct sequencing. TheABCC25'-promoter variants -1549G greater than A (rs1885301) and -1019A greater than G (rs2804402), the UTR variant -24C greater than T (rs717620), the coding region variant 1249G greater than A (rs2273697), the intron 26 variant -34T greater than C (rs17216177), and the synonymous variant 3972C greater than T (rs3740066) were genotyped in 200 liver samples. Briefly, PCR for direct sequencing was carried out after optimization using a GeneAmp 9700 thermal cycler (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). Sequencing analysis was done on an ABI 3700 automated sequencer using the ABI PRISM BigDye system. For Taqman 5'-nuclease sequencing, PCR and sequencing were performed in one reaction using specific primers for the variant of interest, either by Assays-on-Demand (-24C greater than T and 3972C greater than T; Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) or Assays-by-Design (primer/probes in Supplemental Table 2). TheABCC23972C greater than T SNP was also genotyped in 56 liver and 34 kidney samples using the DMET array chip on an Illumina platform; theABCC23972C greater than T SNP was tagged by rs7067971 SNP (r2= 1.0). In all genotyping assays, SNPs were checked for deviations from reported minor allele frequencies and also for Hardy-Weinberg Equilibrium. RNA from human liver samples heterozygous for theABCC23972C greater than T SNP were selected for reverse transcription and further analysis. One microgram of RNA was reverse transcribed using the SuperScript II Reverse Transcriptase kit (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) according to the manufacturer's protocol. Following reverse transcription, approximately 100 bp surrounding the 3972C greater than T SNP site was PCR amplified from the resulting cDNA and genomic DNA (gDNA) using specific primers. Excess dNTPs and primers were removed from the amplified product by incubating in shrimp alkaline phosphatase (Promega, Madison, WI) andExoI(New England Biolabs, Beverly, MA). PCR products then underwent single base extension using the SNaPshot mix (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) and extension primers. Allele abundance was measured by an ABI 3700 sequencer. Peak heights of each allele were recorded from the resulting chromatogram. An allelic imbalance ratio was quantified by the following equation:Nonewhere C1and G1are the peak heights of one allele in the cDNA and gDNA, respectively, and C2and G2are the peak heights of the second allele. The genomic DNA ratio was used as an internal normalization control to account for any fluorophore differences between the two alleles. To equalize the ratios in graphical space, the values were log-transformed. Log-transformed values were defined as follows: log R = 0, no preference for either allele; log R 0, preference for allele 1; and log R 0, preference for allele 2. ABCC2 mRNA expression was measured in 56 Caucasian kidney and 34 Caucasian liver samples using BioTrove Open Array technology according to the manufacturer's protocol (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA). ABCC2 mRNA expression was normalized to a geometric mean of the expression of GAPDH, beta-2 microglobin, and beta-actin and expressed as 2-DeltaCt. To identify polymorphisms in theABCC2promoter region, a 1.6 kb region upstream from the ATG start site was sequenced from 247 ethnically diverse DNA samples from the Coriell Institute. Twelve polymorphisms were found in this region (Table 1), including two SNPs in the 5'-untranslated region (-1 to -247 bp from the translation start site). All other SNPs were found more than 700 bp upstream from the translation start site. An insertion was discovered at -1059 in a single chromosome in the African American population. There were no variations found between -247 and -500 bp, the region required for basal expression [7]. Four polymorphisms (rs1885301, rs7910642, rs2804402 and rs717620) were considered cosmopolitan and were found at greater than 5% frequency in each ethnic population. The -798C greater than A, -1059+G, -1292A greater than G and -1563G greater than A were rare and African American specific. The -733G greater than A variant was specific to the Asian American population, and the -23G greater than A UTR SNP was Pacific Islander specific. The non-singleton variants in the Caucasian, African American and Asian American populations were organized into eight different promoter haplotypes (Table 2). In addition to the reference haplotype, a haplotype containing the -1549G greater than A, -1019A greater than G and -24C greater than T variants and a second containing only the -1023G greater than A variant were found at high frequencies in each of the ethnic groups. The combination of the -1549G greater than A and -1019A greater than G variants was common in Caucasians and African Americans (frequency of 12% and 26%, respectively) but not observed in the Asian American population. Three African American specific haplotypes were identified, specifically -1549G greater than A/-1292A greater than G/-1019A greater than G, 1549G greater than A/-1239G greater than A/-1019A greater than G and -1549G greater than A, at frequencies of 2%, 3% and 10%, respectively. To assess if promoter polymorphisms have an effect onABCC2promoter activity a 1.6 kb fragment was amplified from genomic DNA and cloned into the multiple cloning site of the promoter-less luciferase plasmid, pGL4.11b. Single variant or promoter haplotypes were introduced by site-directed mutagenesis using specific primers. A plasmid containing the reference sequence showed approximately 70-fold higher activity than the promoter-less pGL4.11b plasmid. TheABCC2-24C greater than T SNP, when introduced both as a single variant and as part of the -24C greater than T/-1019A greater than G/-1549G greater than A haplotype, showed a significant 35% increase in reporter activity compared to the referenceABCC2promoter sequence (P less than 0.0001). Reporter activity of promoter constructs carrying other SNPs and haplotypes were not significantly different from the reference (Figure 1). There was no association of the commonABCC2promoter variants (-1549A greater than G, -1023G greater than A and -24C greater than T) with ABCC2 mRNA levels in 34 Caucasian liver and 56 Caucasian kidney samples (data not shown). Allele specific expression was investigated as a possible mechanism for observed associations ofABCC23972C greater than T with various phenotypes. None,None,NoneOf 200 liver samples available, the majority (n=137) were of known Caucasian descent and were used for this analysis. The sample sizes of other ethnic groups were too small for inclusion. Haplotypes were constructed using five additional polymorphisms commonly found with the 3972C greater than T variant and the distribution of these haplotypes in Caucasians is shown inTable 3. Ten different haplotypes were estimated for the 137 liver samples. A total of 53 Caucasian liver samples were heterozygous at the 3972C greater than T polymorphic site. Seven livers carried low frequency haplotypes that were not considered further and five liver RNA samples could not be reverse transcribed and were also removed from the analysis. Results of the allele specific expression analysis are presented for the most common haplotype pairs (n = 41;Figure 2). Overall, there was a statistically significant preference for the 3972C allele compared to the 3972T allele (log ratios greater than 0,P less than 0.0001). When examining haplotype pairs, H1/H2 (P less than 0.01), H2/H3 (P less than 0.0001) and H3/H4 (P less than 0.01) showed a significant preference for the C allele, suggesting that H2 and H4 might be driving this allelic imbalance. Samples carrying H2/H3 showed the highest mean C/T ratios of all haplotype combinations; in these samples, the C allele was 14% higher in abundance than the T allele. To assess if 3972C greater than T allelic imbalance is pronounced enough to affect total ABCC2 mRNA expression we genotyped 34 additional Caucasian liver and 56 Caucasian kidney samples for this SNP using a tagging SNP (rs7067971) and quantified ABCC2 mRNA expression. No association was observed in these samples between 3972C greater than T genotype and ABCC2 mRNA expression (Figure 3). MRP2 is one of the most important efflux transporters and can transport a large number of drugs and their conjugates. TheABCC2gene encoding MRP2 is highly polymorphic and genetic variability is associated with interindividual differences in pharmacokinetics, drug response and toxicity. In particular, non-synonymous coding region polymorphisms and disease mutations have been associated with changes in ABCC2 expression and/or MRP2 function. None-NoneThe effects ofABCC2promoter and synonymous variants are less well understood. The purpose of this study was two-fold; first, to identify and characterize the functional effect of common variants in theABCC2promoter and 5'-UTR. In addition, studies were carried out to determine if allelic imbalance associated with the synonymous 3972C greater than T allele might provide mechanistic insight into the association of this variant with irinotecan disposition and toxicity. None,None,None,NoneThe proximal promoter region ofABCC2has several common polymorphisms in the 1600 bp region upstream of the transcription start site. Interestingly, the region containing the core promoter (-300 to -500 bpNone,None) is devoid of any common genetic variation, consistent with a significant role in the constitutive regulation of ABCC2 expression. The most common promoter region haplotypes contain the -1549G greater than A and -1019G greater than A polymorphisms, often together with the -24C greater than T UTR variant. The association of -1549G greater than A, -1019G greater than A and -24C greater than T polymorphisms with increased irinotecan and/or SN-38 exposure following irinotecan treatmentNone,None,Nonesuggests that these promoter region variants might influenceABCC2transcription and therefore expression. However, ourin vitrostudies failed to show a significant effect of the -1549G greater than A and -1019G greater than A variants, alone or in combination, within vitropromoter activity. Interestingly, the -24C greater than T variant, alone and combined with the -1549G greater than A and -1019G greater than A variants, modestly increased promoter activity. If increased promoter activity translated into increased ABCC2 expression, then irinotecan and SN-38 exposure would be expected to be lower compared to patients with the reference sequence. However,ABCC2-24C greater than T has been associated with increased irinotecan and SN-38 exposure, suggesting reduced transport of these substrates. None,NoneOnly limited studies have been previously carried out to characterize the functional impact of genetic polymorphisms in theABCC2promoter and 5'-UTR region. In cell-based reporter gene assays the -24C greater than T/-1549G greater than A haplotype decreased promoter activity 39%Noneand the -24C greater than T variant alone caused a 20% reduction in promoter activity. NoneThe reporter plasmids used in the current and previous studies contain different lengths of upstream DNA sequence which may account for the varying results. In cell lines with different genotypes, the -24C greater than T polymorphism had no effect on DNA binding or mRNA stability but was associated with reduced protein expression and corresponding effects on transport function. NoneConsistent with these cell-based findings, -24C greater than T had no effect on the expression of ABCC2 mRNA in hippocampal, intestinal, placental or adenocarcinoma samples. None,None,None-NoneIn contrast, lower levels of ABCC2 renal mRNA were reported in patients carrying the -24T allele. NoneIn addition to associations of -24C greater than T with irinotecan and SN-38 exposure, this variant has also been associated with increased diclofenac hepatotoxicityNone, greater risk of platinum hematological toxicityNoneand antiepileptic drug resistanceNone, and increased response to irinotecan and cisplatin treatment. NoneMost of these findings have not been replicated, and in the case of antiepileptic drug resistance, recent data refutes the original association. NoneA possible reason for the inconsistency between studies is thatABCC2promoter SNPs previously associated with clinical phenotypes (e.g. , SN-38 pharmacokinetics and drug toxicities) are not causative and are in linkage disequilibrium with other SNPs (cis- or trans-acting) that are functional. In support of this alternative explanation, ENCODE data available on the UCSC genome browser indicates there are only two clusters of transcription factors binding in theABCC2promoter region and there is very little overlap of any SNPs previously associated with clinical phenotypes with this region. This publically available data is consistent with our findings that the commonly studiedABCC2promoter SNPs are not critical for transcriptional regulation of ABCC2 and that other SNPs and transcriptional modulators may be responsible for variability in MRP2 expression and function. For example, transacting SNPs as well as epigenetic mechanisms may be involved in the regulation of ABCC2 expression. Further studies will be necessary to fully understand the functional and clinical impact of any of theABCC2promoter/UTR polymorphisms. ABCC2-24C greater than T is in linkage disequilibrium (LD) with a synonymous 3972C greater than T polymorphism, raising the possibility that previously reported associations of the 5'-UTR variant with clinical phenotypes may reflect functional changes related to the synonymous variant. In allelic imbalance studies we found a significant preference for the 3972C allele compared to the 3972T allele. This appears to be driven by a haplotype (H2) that includes polymorphisms at -1549, -1019 and -24 inABCC2,and H4 which includes only the-1549 and -1019 SNPs. The relative effect of the observed allelic imbalance is modest, with at most a 14% average increase in transcription of the 3972C allele compared to the T allele. However, a large degree of interindividual variability was observed in this measurement and up to 45% increases were measured. The allelic imbalance did not affect total hepatic or renal ABCC2 mRNA levels, suggesting its clinical significance will be limited except perhaps in individuals with extreme degrees of allele specific expression. A recent paper suggests that the 3972C greater than T variant could also be acting through a posttranscriptional mechanism. The-24C greater than T variant was associated with a modest decrease in MRP2 recombinant protein expression, while 3972C greater than T variant had much more profound effect and drove the observed decrease in protein expression with the -24T/3972T haplotype. NoneInterestingly, no effect on mRNA expression was observed, suggesting these polymorphisms play an important role in MRP2 translational regulation. The contribution of genetic variation to posttranscriptional regulation of ABCC2/MRP2 expression should be further explored. Additional mechanisms for regulation of ABCC2/MRP2, including eQTLs and epigenetics, also warrant investigation. Interindividual variation in these mechanisms may contribute to variation in transport of endogenous and xenobiotic substrates of MRP2. In summary, a number of common promoter and 5'-UTR polymorphisms inABCC2are found at relatively high frequency across different ethnic groups. The limited, if any, effect of these variants on promoter activity suggests that reported associations with clinical phenotypes are not a result of impaired transcription. The 3972C greater than T synonymous variant is associated with allelic specific expression, although the magnitude of the effect is modest. Additional mechanisms will need to be explored to account for the reported association ofABCC2promoter variants with irinotecan disposition and other drug response phenotypes.