Sensing of luminal contents by the gastrointestinal (GI) tract mucosa plays a critical role in the control of digestion, absorption, food intake and metabolism1,2by triggering functional responses appropriate for beneficial or potentially harmful substances. Enteroendocrine (EEC) cells act as specialized transducers of luminal content, by releasing signalling molecules, which activate nerve fibres as well as local and distant targets to influence gut functions. EECs can be either 'open-type' or 'closed-type' depending on their microvilli reaching or not the lumen1-3. Both types of cells can be regulated by intraluminal content, either directly ('open cells') or indirectly ('closed cells') through neural and humoural mechanisms to release a variety of secretory products, including gastrin (G cells), ghrelin (P or X cells), somatostatin (D cells), cholecystokinin (CCK) (I cells), serotonin (enterochromaffin cells), glucose-dependent insulinotropic peptide (GIP) (K cells), glucagon-like peptides (GLPs) and peptide YY (PYY) (L cells), according to the different substances detected in the lumen1-3. Once released, these signalling molecules affect different functions ranging from gastrointestinal motility and secretion to feeding regulationviathe brain-gut axis1-3. The discovery that taste receptors (TRs) and signalling molecules identified in the oral cavity are expressed in the GI mucosa, suggests that they play a role in chemosensing in the gut. TRs are G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) sensing bitter (T2Rs), or sweet and umami (T1Rs) tastes. T2Rs are a large family of receptors (25-36 in mammals) perceiving a multitude of tastants, whereas T1Rs comprise 3 receptors that heterodimerize to sense sweetness (T1R2 and T1R3) or umami (T1R1 and T1R3)4-6. T1Rs and T2Rs mediate gustatory signalling by interacting with specific Galpha subunits, including alpha-gustducin (Galphagust) and alpha-transducin (Galphatran)7through the activation of different effector systems leading to intracellular Ca2+increase and transmitter release. Galphagustor Galphatranimmunoreactivity (IR) has been localized to epithelial EECs and non-EECs in the rodent8-11, pig12,13and human14GI tract and pancreatic duct15. The aims of this study were to characterize the cellular sites of expression of Galphatranand test the hypothesis that Galphatranis modulated by fasting and refeeding in the GI tract of the pig, an animal model closer to humans compared with rodents for food intake, body size, lifespan and body proportion. Large White male pigs (n= 12), of about 45 days of age with an average weight of 12.0 +/- 0.3 kg, purchased from Suidea (Reggio Emilia, Italy), were fed with a standard balanced diet and housed individually in pens with a mesh floor in a temperature-controlled room and tap water freely available. Following 1 day adaptation, animals were divided into three groups: standard diet (control,n= 4), fasted for 24 h (fasted,n= 4) and refed for 24 h after fasting (refed,n= 4). Experimental procedures were approved by the Ethic Committee for Experimental Animals of the University of Bologna, Italy. Pigs were deeply anaesthetized with sodium thiopental (10 mg/kg body weight, Zoletil 100, Virbac) and killed by an intracardiac injection of TanaxNone(0.5 ml/kg BW; Intervet Italia). Specimens of the GI tract: oesophagus (cervical, thoracic and abdominal tract), stomach (cardiac, near to the gastric diverticulum; oxyntic, in the greater curvature; and pyloric, close to the pyloric sphincter), duodenum (about 10 cm from the pyloric sphincter), middle jejunum and ileum, caecum, ascending colon (near the centrifugal turns), descending colon (about 25 cm from the anus) and rectum (in theampulla recti) were collected, pinned flat on balsa wood, fixed in 10% buffered formalin for 24 h at room temperature (RT), dehydrated and embedded in paraffin. Serial (5 mum thick) sections mounted on poly-L-lysine-coated slides were processed for single and double labelling immunofluorescence using antibodies directed to Galphatranor Galphagust, chromogranin A (CgA), a generalized marker for EECs, or specific markers for EEC subtypes (ghrelin, GHR, somatostatin, SOM and gastrin/cholecystokinin GAS/CCK) (Table 1). Briefly, sections were deparaffinized through graded ethanols to xylene, rehydrated and heated in sodium citrate buffer (pH 6.0) in a microwave (2 cycles at 800 W, 5 min each) for antigen unmasking. Sections were incubated in 15% normal horse serum/0.01 M phosphate buffer saline (PBS) (1 h at RT) to prevent non-specific staining, followed by primary antibodies in PBS (overnight) and a mixture of fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-conjugated, tetramethyl rhodamine isothiocyanate (TRITC)-conjugated, Alexa Fluor(r) 594- and Alexa Fluor(r) 488-conjugated secondary antibodies all diluted in PBS (Table 1), then coverslipped with buffered glycerol, pH 8.6. As the antibodies to Galphatranand Galphagustwere generated in the same species, serial sections (3 mum thick) were used to test their colocalization. List and dilution of primary and secondary antibodiesCURE/DDC, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, USA; Chemicon International, Temecula, CA, USA; Monosan, Sanbio B.V. Frontstraat, Uden, the Netherlands; Santa Cruz Biotecnology, Inc., CA, USA. ); Calbiochem-Novabiochem Corporation, San Diego, CA, USA; Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR., USA; Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories, Inc., West Grove, PA, USA). Specificity of Galphatran, Galphagustand GAS/CCK antibodies has been tested by Western blot (Supplementary material) whereas specificity of CgA monoclonal antibody (clone LK2H10) has been previously reported16. GHR antibody specificity was assessed by pre-adsorption with an excess of the homologous peptide (sc-10368 P, Santa Cruz, CA, USA) or another ghrelin peptide (code 031-52; Phoenix Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Burlingame, CA, USA). The pattern obtained with our S6 SOM antibody completely overlapped with that of SOM rabbit polyclonal antiserum (Monosan SANBIO B.V., Uden, The Netherlands-catalogue PS 204), whose specificity was shown by immunoblocking in the pig gut and pancreas. Cell counting was performed with a 40 * objective lens using a Zeiss Axioplan microscope (Carl Zeiss, Oberkochen, Germany) with appropriate filter cubes to discriminate different wave fluorescence, images were collected with a Polaroid DMC digital photocamera (Polaroid, Cambridge, Mass., USA) and minimal adjustment to brightness and contrast was performed with Corel Photo Paint and Corel Draw (Corel, Dublin, Ireland). Cell counting was performed in a blind fashion by two investigators. For each piglet, Galphatran-IR cells were counted in 36 random microscope fields (each field, 0.28 mm2), for a total area of 10 mm2, in the cardiac, oxyntic and pyloric mucosa, in 50 random villi and glands in the small intestine, and in 50 crypts in the colon. Only villi/glands/crypts located perpendicularly to the mucosal surface were counted. The values were pooled for each experimental group (control, fasted and refed respectively) and, subsequently, the mean and the percentage were calculated. Values were expressed as mean +/- standard deviation (SD). Data were analysed usinganovaOne-Way (Graph Prism 4, GraphPad Software, Inc., La Jolla, CA, USA). Statistical significance was determined using the Student'st-test. AP less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant. Galphatran-IR cells were detected throughout the whole pig GI tract (Fig. 1A-G), except the oesophagus and oxyntic mucosa. In the pylorus, intense Galphatran-IR was observed in the basal portion of the gastric gland and in the epithelial lining of the mucosal folds (Fig. 1A and F); Galphatran-IR cells had elongated, 'bottle-like', morphology with homogenously labelled cytoplasm (Fig. 1E and G). In the small intestine, a subset of cells along the crypt-villus axis showed Galphatran-IR (Fig. 1B, E and G), whereas in the large intestine, labelled cells were generally located in the surface and glandular epithelium (Fig. 1C and D). Most Galphatran-IR cells had two thin cytoplasmic prolongations, one extending to the endoluminal mucosal surface (Fig. 1E and G) and one to the basal lamina, suggesting they are 'EEC open-type' cells1,3. In the cardiac and pyloric mucosa, some cells were confined to the basal lamina and did not reach the lumen (Fig. 1F), like 'EEC closed-type' cells1,3. Localization of Galphatran-IR in the pig GI tract. A-Dshow images of Galphatran-IR cells in the pyloric (A), jejunum (B), caecum (C) and rectum (D) mucosa (arrowheads). Galphatran-IR cells have the morphology of open-type enteroendocrine cells in the top of the villi of the duodenum (E, arrowhead) and of closed-type enteroendocrine cells in the pyloric mucosa (F, arrowheads). The bottom images show a Galphatran-IR enteroendocrine cell expressing chromogranin A (CgA) (GandH, respectively; arrowheads); the arrow in G and H indicates a Galphatran-IR cell (G) not containing CgA-IR (H). A, C, E and F: scale bars = 50 mum; B, D, G and H: scale bars = 100 mum. In the stomach, the highest density of Galphatran-IR cells was in the pylorus (there was an average of about 18.9 cells/mm2or 5.3 cells per field); in the small intestine, the highest density of Galphatran-IR cells was in the duodenum followed by the jejunum and ileum, whereas in the large intestine it was in the rectum followed by descending colon, caecum and ascending colon (Fig. 2A and B). There was a decrease in the density of Galphatran-IR cells in fasted animals, which was significant in the cardiac mucosa (29.3 +/- 0.8versus64.8 +/- 1.3,P less than 0.05versuscontrol), pylorus (98.8 +/- 1.7versus190.8 +/- 1.9,P less than 0.0 l), caecum (8 +/- 0.01versus15.5 +/- 0.5,P less than 0.01), descending colon (17.8 +/- 0.3versus23 +/- 0.6,P less than 0.05) and rectum (15.3 +/- 0.3versus27.5 +/- 0.7,P less than 0.05), but not in the other regions. Interestingly, refeeding restored the control level of Galphatran-IR cells in the cardiac mucosa (57 +/- 1versus29.3 +/- 0.8 in fasted,P less than 0.01), but not in the pylorus, caecum, descending colon and rectum where the number of Galphatran-IR cells in refed was comparable to fasted pigs. In the jejunum, Galphatran-IR cells in the refed group were less than in the fasted condition and were significantly lower than in controls (9.3 +/- 0.2 in refedversus19 +/- 0.3 in control,P less than 0.01). In the ileum and ascending colon, the number of Galphatran-IR cells in fasted and refed animals was comparable to controls. Graphs inAandBindicate the mean number of Galphatran-IR cells in the different segments of the pig GI tract. Controls, fasted and refed are denoted as black, white and grey bars respectively. Different letters indicate a significant (P less than 0.05) statistical difference among groups. Values are expressed as mean +/- SD. The majority of Galphatran-IR cells co-expressed CgA: 99% of the Galphatran-IR cells in the cardiac and pyloric mucosa were immunopositive for CgA, whereas 83% and 98% of Galphatran-IR cells were immunopositive for CgA in the small and large intestine respectively. However, some cells were Galphatran-IR, but CgA negative (Fig. 1G and H). In the stomach, Galphatran-IR/CgA-IR cells were numerous in the glandular epithelium. The mean numbers of Galphatran/CgA-IR cells throughout the pig gut are reported inTable 2A. In the cardiac mucosa, the mean number of Galphatran/CgA-IR cells in control and refed groups is higher than that of fasted group (P less than 0.05). In the pyloric mucosa, the mean number of Galphatran/CgA-IR cells in fasted and refed groups was lower than control (controlversusfasted and controlversusrefed,P less than 0.05). A general decrease in Galphatran/CgA-IR cells was observed in the small and large intestine in fasted and refed compared with control. Specifically, in the duodenum and jejunum, the Galphatran/CgA-IR cells were significantly decreased in refed compared with control (P less than 0.05). Moreover, in the duodenum, we found a reduced number of Galphatran/CgA-IR cells in refed compared with fasted (P less than 0.05). Galphatran/CgA-IR cells were more abundant in the caecum, descending colon and rectum of control group compared with fasted (P less than 0.05), whereas in the caecum and in the rectum, refed showed a number of Galphatran/CgA-IR lower than control (P less than 0.05). The percentage of the Galphatranon the total of CgA-IR cells have been indicated inTable 2B. Furthermore, there were no statistically significant differences in the absolute numbers of CgA-IR cells in the gastric and intestinal mucosa among the three experimental groups. (A) Mean number of Galphatran/CgA-IR cells in the pig GI tract. (B) Percentage of Galphatran/total CgA-IR cells in the pig GI tractValues refer to a total area of 10 mm2for each group. The other values represent the percentage evaluated in 50 villi and in 50 intestinal glands for each group, respectively. Values with different superscripts within the same column differ significantly (P less than 0.05). Galphatran/GHR-IR cells were numerous in the pylorus, from the neck to the base of the glands (Fig. 3A and B), and less abundant in cardiac glands (Fig. 3C and D). Most Galphatran/GHR cells were 'closed-type', lying at the gland basal lamina. Few Galphatran/GHR-IR cells in the surface epithelium were 'open-type' (Fig. 3C and D). In the cardiac and pyloric mucosa, approximately 96% and 91% of Galphatran-IR cells, respectively, co-expressed GHR. Galphatran/GHR-IR cells were significantly reduced in fastedversuscontrol pigs in both cardiac mucosa (P less than 0.01) and pylorus (P less than 0.05). In refed, they were partly restored in the cardiac mucosa (P less than 0.05), but not pylorus. The mean number and percentage of the Galphatranon the total of GHR-IR cells are reported inTable 3. In the cardiac mucosa, the number of GHR-IR cells decreased in fastedversuscontrol (114.8 +/- 29.4versus244.5 +/- 71.3,P less than 0.01), while it increased in refedversusfasted (241.3 +/- 57.5versus114.8 +/- 29.4,P less than 0.01). There were no statistically significant differences in the mean numbers of GHR-IR cells in the pyloric mucosa among the three experimental groups. Mean number and percentage of the colocalized Galphatrans/total GHR-IR cells in the cardiac and pyloric mucosaValues with different superscripts within the same column indicate statistical significance (P less than 0.05). Colocalization of Galphatran-IR (A,C,EandG, arrowheads) with ghrelin (GHR) in the pyloric mucosa (BandD, arrowheads) and cholecystokinin (CCK) in the jejunum (FandH, arrowheads). In general, the Galphatran/GHR-labelled cells were found lying close to the basal lamina of the glands (typical closed-type morphology) (AandB, arrowheads); the arrows inAandBindicate a GHR-IR cell (B) not containing Galphatran-IR (A). In some cases, Galphatran/GHR-IR cells were observed in the surface epithelium (typical open-type morphology) (CandD, arrowheads). The Galphatran/CCK immunopositive cells were observed in the villi (EandF, arrowheads) and in the intestinal gland of the jejunum (GandH, arrowheads). A, B, C, D, G and H: scale bars = 50 mum; E and F: scale bars = 30 mum. Co-expression of Galphatranand CCK was observed in open-type cells in the surface and glandular epithelium of the jejunum (Fig. 3E-H). As our monoclonal antibody cannot discriminate CCK and GAS, we could not assess the actual number of GAS and CCK-IR cells in the duodenum where both cell types are present. Few Galphatran/SOM cells (about 1 positive cell/400 villi) were detected (Fig. 4A and B). The mean number and percentage of the Galphatrancompared with the total number of CCK-IR cells are reported inTable 4. In the jejunum, approximately 59% of Galphatran-IR cells co-expressed CCK. Galphatran/CCK-IR cells were reduced in fasted and refed compared with controls (P less than 0.01) in the jejunum. Galphatran/CCK-IR cells were not visualized in the pylorus and cardiac mucosa (Fig. 4C and D). Finally, occasional Galphatran/Galphagust-IR cells were detected in the pylorus (Fig. 4C and D) and duodenum (Fig. 4E-H), which expressed CgA-IR (Fig. 4G and H). Furthermore, the number of CCK-IR cells decreased in fastedversuscontrol (19.3 +/- 2.5versus10.3 +/- 1, P less than 0.01), while no changes were observed in refedversusfasted and control groups. Mean number and percentage of the colocalized Galphatran/total CCK-IR cells in the jejunumValues with different superscripts within the same column indicate statistical significance (P less than 0.05). Enteroendocrine cells of the duodenum co-expressing Galphatranand SOM-IR (AandB, arrowheads). Some cells co-expressing Galphatran/Galphagust-IRs (CandD, arrows) (in green) were observed in the pyloric mucosa; these cells were negative for gastrin (GAS-IR) (in red). PhotomicrographsEandFshow co-expressing Galphatran- and Galphagust-IR enteroendocrine cells (in green) (arrows) in serial sections of the duodenum. The Galphatranand Galphagustcolocalization is readily visible inGandH(merged images) with chromogranin A (CgA) (arrows) labelled by the red fluorochrome (arrowheads). A-H: scale bars = 50 mum. Taste receptors are likely to represent an important mechanism for sensing nutrients and non-nutrients in the GI lumen and contribute to the initiation of appropriate physiological response of digestion/absorption of nutrients or elimination of harmful substancesviaactivation of neuronal and endocrine pathways. We showed that (a) Galphatrancells are distributed throughout the GI tract in the pig, a commonly used animal model for studies of human GI physiology and ingestive behaviour, with the exception of the oesophagus and the oxyntic mucosa, (b) most Galphatrancells are EEC of the 'open' type, (c) many Galphatrancells contain GHR in the stomach and CCK in the small intestine, whereas a few contain SOM in the upper bowel, (d) some Galphatrancells contained Galphagust, and (e) fasting and refeeding changed the density of Galphatran-IR cells, effect that was statistically significantversuscontrols in most, but not all gut regions. These findings support the concept that TRs participate to chemosensing processes controlling multiple GI functions, including food intake and metabolism. Our results expand previous reports of Galphatranor Galphagustin the rodent3,8-11,17, pig12,13and human14GI mucosa by showing a systematic analysis and characterization of mucosal cells expressing Galphatranin the pig intestine, an animal model closer to human than rodents, and providing evidence that the expression of this taste-related signalling molecule is modified by feeding and fasting. Galphatran-IR was predominantly in EECs, but the colocalization with CgA was not complete suggesting that Galphatran-IR is also in non-EECs (likely brush cells), as it has been shown for Galphagustin the mouse10. On the other hand, in the human colon14and pig small intestine13, Galphagusthas been reported exclusively in EECs. Galphatran-IR cells had a different density throughout the gut, which was high in the stomach, decreased from the duodenum to the ileum, then increased from the caecum to the rectum. These findings are consistent with species and region differences and suggest that TRs exert distinct functions according to the gut region. Like Galphagust, Galphatranmediates signals initiated by tastants acting at T1Rs and the T2Rs7,18,19. Thus, Galphatrancells are likely to serve different chemosensitive modalities depending upon the luminal content and the TR stimulated19. The colocalization of Galphatranwith GHR in the stomach, and CCK and SOM in the small intestine is in agreement with previous studies in rodents and human8,9,11,14, and in EECs lines20. GHR is an orexigenic peptide regulating energy balance homeostasis21, GI motility and secretion22, and feeding behaviour23, in several species including pigs24. CCK exerts a prominent role in satiety conveying signals elicited by nutrients (e.g. fats and proteins)viasensory nerve pathways to the brain25. SOM inhibits gastric acid secretion, gastric emptying and smooth muscle contraction and GI hormone release26. Thus, the colocalization of Galphatranwith these peptides is consistent with an involvement of TRs in the control of satiety and food intake, energy balance metabolism and GI secretion and motility. Food deprivation and refeeding alter the morphology of the weaned pig GI tract mucosa with fasting inducing mucosa atrophy in the upper small intestine and refeeding partially restoring it27. We demonstrated that 24 h fasting and 24 h refeeding modified the number of Galphatran-IR cells in most regions of the pig gut. The number of CgA-IR cells was not modified by fasting and refeeding in most regions with the exception of the caecum and descending colon, therefore it is unlikely that the reduction in Galphatran-IR cells observed in fasted and in some regions also in refed animals is due to mucosa atrophy or lack of mucosal restoration following refeeding, although this possibility cannot be excluded. Fasting induces multiple changes in the EEC system such as increasing GHR and lowering GAS/CCK28,29peptides that influence feeding behaviour and colocalize with Galphatran-IR. Our results indicated that in the cardiac and pyloric mucosa, the number of Galphatran/GHR cells is greater in normally fed compared with 24 h fasted piglets; similarly, the overall density of GHR-IR cells was lower in fasted than fed or refed animals. However, the increased Galphatran/GHR-IR cell expression, as observed during refeeding state in our model, may not necessarily correspond to increased GHR plasma levels during fasting. A significant increase in plasma GHR was reported30in weaning pigs following 36 h fasting, with a decrease with 12 h fasting, indicating that the length of food deprivation affects GHR response. Animal ages might also affect hormonal responses to fasting, as young animals possess fewer energy reserves and less body fat, while having higher energy requirements in relation to rapid body growth31. Our data showed a significant reduction in Galphatran/CCK-IR cells and in CCK-IR cells overall in fasted and refed pigs compared with controls. This is in agreement with previous reports of a decrease in CCK plasma concentrations and mRNA expression during fasting, while returning to pre-fasting values after either 24 h refeeding in the rat small intestine32and 1 h refeeding in lactating sows33. However, the reasons why in this study we did not detect an increase in Galphatran/CCK-IR cells during refeeding remain to be elucidated. It is possible that factors such as caloric intake, type of diet and slaughter time after refeeding may contribute to explain why CCK cells do not return to pre-fasting values. In summary, TRs and downstream molecules might exert a variety of functions ranging from sensing beneficial nutrients (e.g. sweet and umami), thus inducing secretion and motility to facilitate digestion, absorption and food intake, to detection of bitter, potentially harmful substances, thus inducing a defensive response. The latter could be in the form of inhibition of gastric emptying to reduce absorption, increase in intestinal secretion to facilitate elimination, vomiting or avoidance. Taste-related molecules in the distal colon and rectum could also serve as a line of defence against bacteria, which are particularly abundant in these regions. This is supported by the findings that quorum-sensing molecules produced by Gram-negative bacteria activate a GPCR-mediated signalling cascade in EEC lines, which is likely to involve T2R (Sternini C and Rozengurt E, unpublished). Further studies are required to better understand TR functions in the GI tract in response to feeding, including their regulation with specific dietary components in relationship to peptide release in different regions of the GI tract.