Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) is an increasing health concern in the U.S., and it is projected that the prevalence of this disease could exceed 13% in adults greater than 20 years of age by the year 2021 (1). This is of significant public health concern because of the known association between diabetes and cardiovascular disease (CVD) (2). The year 4 outcomes of the Look AHEAD Trial, which were reported recently, demonstrated the effects of an intensive lifestyle intervention (ILI) compared with a diabetes support and education (DSE) intervention on weight loss and CVD risk factors, where weight loss was significantly greater in ILI compared with DSE (3). ILI participants attended two group meetings and one individual session per month, and one motivational campaign to promote adherence to the recommended weight loss behaviors, during months 7-12. Among participants who had fitness data measured at the year 4 visit, we compared the two treatment groups (ILI and DSE) on the distributions of selected baseline characteristics using the generalized linear model implemented in PROC GLM. The difference in percent fitness change between ILI and DSE observed at year 4 was significant after adjustment for baseline fitness (5.40 vs. -0.83%;P less than 0.0001), change in weight (3.62 vs. 1.03%;P= 0.001), or both baseline fitness and change in weight (3.70 vs. 0.94%;P less than 0.001). Bivariate analyses, adjusted for baseline fitness, were performed to determine the influence of baseline characteristics on change in fitness at the year 4 assessment. These parameters, along with important interaction effects, were examined using multivariate analysis to further determine factors that contributed to the change in fitness observed at years 1, 2, and 4 in this study. Data were analyzed to examine if change in glycemic control, measured by HbA1c, was influenced by fitness improvement, with fitness change categorized as described above. The contribution of fitness to improving glycemic control, and the finding that ILI resulted in greater improvements in fitness compared with DSE, may be of particular importance in the Look AHEAD Trial, where the primary research question is to compare CVD outcomes in response to ILI compared with DSE. These results demonstrated an association between change in fitness and improvements in glycemic control, expressed as HbA1c, even after controlling for weight loss in both ILI and DSE. 