Here, we aimed to evaluate fetal growth and perinatal morbidity in relation to gestational weight gain in obese women with type 2 diabetes. Further, all women received both oral and written information advising them to gain between 0 and 5 kg body weight overall during pregnancy, with the main weight gain in the second half of pregnancy. Insulin treatment was commenced if the women did not obtain adequate glycemic control from diet alone. Maternal characteristics at first visitMaternal HbA1c, urine ketone bodies, weight gain, and insulin treatment during pregnancyA gestational weight gain of less than =5 kg was significantly associated with a more proportionate birth weight with lower median birth weightzscore (-0.44 [range -3.31 to 1.98] vs. 0.84 [-2.32 to 4.02],P= 0.008) as well as a lower rate of LGA infants (P= 0.041) compared with those gaining greater than 5 kg during pregnancy (Table 3). In this retrospective cohort study evaluating how the medical advice regarding restricting maternal weight gain to 0-5 kg during pregnancy in obese women with type 2 diabetes affects fetal growth and perinatal morbidity in an unselected cohort of patients, we found that those who gained 5 kg or less had infants with a more proportionate birth weight, represented by a smallerzscore, a lower proportion of LGA infants, and a marginally lower ponderal index. In our study, only one stillbirth occurred, arising from multiple fetal anomalies. The prevalence of LGA infants is comparable to that in other studies (20). Lower gestational weight gain in women with the highest pregestational BMI, as previously found in obese women without diabetes (15), was not present in our material, where women who gained less than =5 kg were less obese before their current pregnancy than those who gained more. In conclusion, we found that in obese women with type 2 diabetes, maternal gestational weight gain less than =5 kg was associated with a more proportionate birth weight and less perinatal morbidity without increased risk of SGA infants. 