Diabetes is recognized as a major risk factor for cardiovascular disease, the leading cause for morbidity and mortality in the diabetic population (1). Diabetic cardiovascular disease results from many causes such as microangiopathy, myocardial metabolic abnormalities, and fibrosis (2,3). Under microangiopathy, the vessel wall of microvessels becomes thicker and vulnerable to bleeding, protein leakage, and slow blood flow. Accumulating evidence has demonstrated that microvascular injury plays a very important role in the diabetic cardiovascular dysfunction (4,5). However, there are still few effective strategies to prevent the progress of microvascular dysfunction in diabetes. Glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1), synthesized and secreted by intestinall-cells, is a peptide with many protective biological functions. GLP-1 receptor (GLP-1R) is widely expressed in islet cells, kidney, lung, brain, and, interestingly, heart (6,7). It has been shown that administration of GLP-1 at the time of reperfusion was effective in decreasing myocardial infarct size in patients with acute myocardial infarction (8). Furthermore, a study of diabetic patients found that infusion of GLP-1 was associated with improved endothelial function (9). More importantly, recent data have suggested that GLP-1 was capable of exerting a direct cytoprotective effect against oxidative stress in diabetic mice aorta (10). Therefore, GLP-1 is of potential interest as a possible therapeutic regimen for treatment of cardiac microvascular injury in diabetes. However, native GLP-1 has a short half-life of minutes before getting degraded rapidly by dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (DPP-4) (11). To assess the potential role of intact GLP-1, DPP-4 inhibitors such as vildagliptin and GLP-1 analog exenatide are used as a means of preventing its degradation. It is well-known that diabetes and hyperglycemia could increase intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS), subsequently inducing apoptotic cell death, inflammation, and injury in endothelial cells (12,13). 