Diabetic retinopathy is a cardinal manifestation of diabetes characterized by abnormalities in the retinal vasculature. In addition to being the leading cause of working-age adult-onset blindness in the developed world, several large prospective studies have shown that the presence and severity of diabetic retinopathy are independent determinants of future cardiovascular (CV) events in people with diabetes (1-9). In a recent systematic review of 17 studies comprising 14,896 people with type 2 diabetes (of mean age 58 years and mean follow-up 9 years), people with any retinopathy were more than twice as likely to die or suffer a fatal or nonfatal CV event than people without retinopathy, and a fourfold higher risk was noted for people with advanced retinopathy (10). The same review also included four studies comprising 4,438 people with type 1 diabetes (of mean age 33 years and mean follow-up 12 years) and reported a 3.5- to 4-fold higher risk of death as well as CV events in the presence of any retinopathy and a 7-fold higher risk with advanced retinopathy (10). Several explanations may account for the relationship between retinopathy and CV outcomes. However, participants in the Eye Study only had 251 ACCORD primary outcomes, including 174 MIs and 48 strokes during follow-up. Moreover, only 45 primary outcomes, 36 MIs and 9 strokes, occurred in people whose retinal disease progressed, and these were distributed across various degrees of progression. This may have been due to the possibility that the ACCORD participants who volunteered for the eye substudy were likely healthier than the average ACCORD participant. Regardless of the reason, it limited the power of the analysis to reliably detect important effects of various degrees of retinopathy or change in retinopathy on individual CV outcomes. Nevertheless, the clear link between progression of retinal disease and CV disease suggests that these two serious consequences of diabetes may share an underlying pathophysiological basis. 