Risk factor-positive status was defined as current smoking, BMI greater than =30 kg/m2, HbA1c greater than 7.0%, SBP greater than 130 mmHg, DBP greater than 80 mmHg, LDL greater than =100 mg/dL, HDL less than =40 mg/dL, TC greater than =200 mg/dL, and TG greater than =150 mg/dL, as recommended by the American Diabetes Association (16) or the Expert Panel on Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood and Cholesterol in Adults (17), or taking medicine to achieve these targets (18,19). Earlier, we reported that at baseline, 16.5% of participants were taking ADM and 14.7% had elevated depression symptom scores (BDI greater than =11), indicating likely mild to moderate depression, and 26.8% had elevated depression symptom scores or were using ADM (12). NoneNoneNoneSeventeen percent of participants with a BDI score less than 11 at baseline had an elevated BDI score at some time during the 4-year follow up. Depression measures and CVD risk factor-positive status by timeThe proportion of participants with an elevated A1C level or taking insulin, as well as the proportion with a BMI greater than =30 kg/m2, differed substantially between intervention groups. ORs for CVD risk factor-positive status with ADM use or BDI greater than =11 the preceding year, controlled for risk factor status in the prior yearIn the DSE cohort, ADM use in the prior year was associated with more prevalent low HDL/medicine use (1.20 [1.03-1.50]), elevated TC/medicine use (1.29 [1.05-1.57]), and current smoking (1.70 [1.04-2.88]). We also conducted a series of ancillary analyses that confirmed the robustness of our original models (results not shown): First, repeating the analyses using continuous BDI scores rather than a dichotomous classification did not change the direction or statistical significance of any relationships with CVD risk factors. We found that depression markers (elevated depression symptom scores or ADM use) during the prior year were associated with current elevated CVD risk factors in both Look AHEAD intervention arms when prior risk factor status and other covariates were controlled. We assessed CVD risk factors in the five domains of glycemia, lipids, blood pressure, smoking, and BMI, all of which are well-documented risk factors for CVD morbidity and mortality (21-25). We note that elevated depression screening scores are often more reflective of general emotional distress than major depressive disorder (27), and in patients with diabetes, they may reflect diabetes-related distress (28). We found essentially the same pattern of associations between ADM use and subsequent CVD risk factor-positive status for all ADMs and for non-TCA or tetracyclic ADMs. Further, the design of the study, assessing depression indicators in the year prior to assessment of CVD, permitted us to draw inferences about directionality that are not possible in cross-sectional studies. In conclusion, among Look AHEAD participants, elevated self-reported depression symptoms and ADM use in the prior year were each independently associated with some but not all CVD risk factors during the first 4 years of the trial; significant associations for elevated risk were most consistent for ADM use. Importantly, Look AHEAD will permit examination of the relationships between depression indicators and actual CVD outcomes, providing a fuller picture of the depression-CVD outcome relationship. 