Human studies have demonstrated a deleterious impact of diabetes mellitus (DM) on endothelial function in women compared with men (1). Accordingly, our aim was to determine ifl-arginine, which is the substrate for NO synthase, would reverse sex-dependent renal hemodynamic and blood pressure differences in the response to clamped hyperglycemia in patients with uncomplicated type 1 DM. On the hyperglycemic day, after baseline blood pressure, renal and plasma cGMP measurements were obtained,l-arginine (Clinalpha, Laufelfingen, Switzerland) was administered at incremental low and moderate doses (100 mg/kg over 30 min and then 250 mg/kg over 30 min) to probe renal hemodynamic effects without confounding systemic hypotensive effects associated with higher doses (6-12). The cGMP assay is based on the competition between cGMP in the standards or samples and a cGMP-acetylcholinesterase conjugate (cGMP tracer) for a limited number of cGMP-specific rabbit antibody binding sites. The intensity of the color is proportional to the amount of cGMP tracer bound to the well, which is inversely proportional to the amount of free cGMP present in the standards or sample (13). For renal hemodynamic parameters, in response tol-arginine during clamped hyperglycemia, GFR and FF decreased in women only, back toward baseline values observed during clamped euglycemia, although GFR remained numerically higher at the end of the hyperglycemicl-arginine infusion compared with the euglycemic baseline (P= not significant). Hemodynamic responses to a graded infusion ofl-NMMA during clamped hyperglycemia in men and women with type 1 diabetesThe protective effect of female sex that is observed in non-DM renal disease is reduced or lost in the presence of DM (4,19-24). The goal of the current study was to determine if NO synthase activation withl-arginine would reverse sex-dependent renal hemodynamic and blood pressure differences in the response to clamped hyperglycemia in type 1 DM patients. In a cohort of hyperfiltering (GFR greater than =135 mL/min/1.73 m2) patients with type 1 DM, we recently demonstrated that NO inhibition withl-NMMA during clamped euglycemia leads to modest declines in GFR and more important suppression of ERPF and cGMP, consistent with dominant preglomerular vasoconstrictive effects observed in animals (13,32). Our data therefore suggest that women exhibit enhanced NO bioactivity in the postglomerular circulation at baseline during clamped euglycemia; clamped hyperglycemia alone quenches postglomerular NO, leading to an increase in GFR and FF with lesser effects on ERPF, and these effects are reversible with infusion ofl-arginine. 