Suboptimal glycemic control (measured using HbA1c), proteinuria (measured using urinalysis), and reduced kidney function (measured using the estimated glomerular filtration rate [eGFR]) are independent predictors of adverse clinical outcomes, including cardiovascular morbidity and mortality, in people with diabetes (9-11). These data are linked to Alberta Health administrative data, which captures resource utilization for all provincial residents with public health insurance. In patients greater than 65 years of age, two-thirds had filled a prescription for one or more oral antidiabetic medication at baseline (62.2%), and approximately one-fifth (17.4%) of patients were on insulin. These measurements revealed that 2.6% of the cohort had an eGFR 30, indicating severe renal impairment, 4.1% had heavy proteinuria, and 9.8% had inadequate glycemic control ( 9% HbA1c) (Table 1). In addition to the laboratory parameters described above, worsening socioeconomic status, Aboriginal status, and increasing Charlson index score were associated with increased 5-year costs. Ordinary least squares regression analysis examining the demographic, clinical, and laboratory factors associated with mean total 5-year costs per patient in people with diabetesThe mean 5-year cost of diabetes in Alberta was CDN $26,978 per patient, excluding drug costs, and CDN $44,511 per patient for patients 65 years of age, including drug costs. (33) studied the association between improvement in glycemic control and cost in a retrospective cohort analysis and found that in patients with high baseline HbA1c( greater than =10%) whose glycemic control improved, statistically significant cost savings were achieved. Our regression model included a "not measured" category for each laboratory marker, which is reflected in the adjusted cost estimates. We did not adjust for medication use since this information was not available for the entire cohort, nor were we able to adjust for unknown factors, such as mild diabetes, misclassification, and more specific socioeconomic characteristics. In addition, although we found a strong association between glycemic control, proteinuria, and kidney function and costs, it is unknown whether improved management would in fact lead to a decrease in health care costs. 