Diabetic retinopathy (DR) is a common and serious condition. It is the leading cause of blindness among working-age adults in the United States (1). Vision loss related to eye disease among people with diabetes is an important disability that threatens independence and can lead to depression, reduced mobility, and reduced quality of life (2). Furthermore, a recent study by Narayan et al. (3) demonstrated that diabetes prevalence in the United States is likely to increase dramatically through 2050, given recent increases in the incidence of diagnosed diabetes, decreases in diabetes-related mortality, and expected changes in the age of the population. The Eye Diseases Prevalence Research Group classified DR into two major outcomes: any DR, as any DR consisting of mild, moderate, or severe DR; and vision-threatening DR (VTDR), as DR likely to result in vision loss on the absence of treatment, consisting of proliferative DR, clinically significant diabetic macular edema (CSME), or both (4). It is also considered relevant that MA turnover calculated by the RetmarkerDR (Critical Health SA) is much less time consuming than MA counting by an expert grader. The observations reported in this article are also expected to have impact on clinical trial design. Excluding from the trials eyes/patients that show little disease activity and are not expected to progress during the trial period would offer a better chance for development of VTDR in the placebo control eyes, thus creating the conditions to identify efficacy of the drug being tested. Limitations of this study include the relatively short duration of the study (2 years) and the lack of more detailed information on the systemic parameters such as lipid stratification. The results of this study confirm that in a prospective study of a relatively large number of patients, MA turnover values obtained from noninvasive color fundus photography based solely on field-2 images may help to identify the eyes/patients at risk for developing CSME and potential vision loss. 