In 2010 we reported that among participants in the Look AHEAD (Action for Health in Diabetes) clinical trial, depression symptoms and ADM use on entry to the study were each independently associated with a wide range of CVD risk factors (12). Their personal physicians provided medical care for all participants. Exclusion criteria were1) underlying diseases or conditions likely to affect the safety of the interventions or factors that might limit adherence to the interventions or affect conduct of the trial, including hospitalization for depression in the past 6 months; suicidal ideation; current diagnosis of schizophrenia, other psychotic disorders, or bipolar disorder; or self-report of alcohol or substance abuse within the past 12 months; or2) other medical, psychiatric, or behavioral limitations (e.g., difficulty completing the 2-week run-in period during which participants were required to record food eaten) that in the judgment of the principal investigator might interfere with study participation or the ability to follow the protocol. Weight and height were measured in duplicate using a digital scale and stadiometer. Risk factor-positive status was defined as current smoking, BMI greater than =30 kg/m2, HbA1c greater than 7.0%, SBP greater than 130 mmHg, DBP greater than 80 mmHg, LDL greater than =100 mg/dL, HDL less than =40 mg/dL, TC greater than =200 mg/dL, and TG greater than =150 mg/dL, as recommended by the American Diabetes Association (16) or the Expert Panel on Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood and Cholesterol in Adults (17), or taking medicine to achieve these targets (18,19). We assessed the association that positive status for each CVD risk factor had with elevated BDI scores and ADM use in the prior year, controlled for CVD risk factor status of interest in the prior year, participant characteristics of age, sex, race, education, history of cardiovascular disease, and duration of diabetes, and year of follow-up. Table 1reports the characteristics of the study population by intervention assignment. Earlier, we reported that at baseline, 16.5% of participants were taking ADM and 14.7% had elevated depression symptom scores (BDI greater than =11), indicating likely mild to moderate depression, and 26.8% had elevated depression symptom scores or were using ADM (12). Thirteen percent of participants not using ADMs at baseline took them at some point during the 4-year follow-up. NoneNoneNoneSeventeen percent of participants with a BDI score less than 11 at baseline had an elevated BDI score at some time during the 4-year follow up. Depression measures and CVD risk factor-positive status by timeThe proportion of participants with an elevated A1C level or taking insulin, as well as the proportion with a BMI greater than =30 kg/m2, differed substantially between intervention groups. ORs for CVD risk factor-positive status with ADM use or BDI greater than =11 the preceding year, controlled for risk factor status in the prior yearIn the DSE cohort, ADM use in the prior year was associated with more prevalent low HDL/medicine use (1.20 [1.03-1.50]), elevated TC/medicine use (1.29 [1.05-1.57]), and current smoking (1.70 [1.04-2.88]). We also conducted a series of ancillary analyses that confirmed the robustness of our original models (results not shown): First, repeating the analyses using continuous BDI scores rather than a dichotomous classification did not change the direction or statistical significance of any relationships with CVD risk factors. In the ancillary analysis, only one of four associations with elevated BDI (the association with A1C greater than 7.0% or insulin in the DSE arm) that had been significant in the primary analysis was significant in the analysis controlled for weight change. We assessed CVD risk factors in the five domains of glycemia, lipids, blood pressure, smoking, and BMI, all of which are well-documented risk factors for CVD morbidity and mortality (21-25). We note that elevated depression screening scores are often more reflective of general emotional distress than major depressive disorder (27), and in patients with diabetes, they may reflect diabetes-related distress (28). The current study does not allow us to assess the possible mechanisms that may account for the association between ADM use and subsequent CVD risk factor-positive status. Among the SSRIs, fluoxetine has been associated with lower levels of glycemia and TG, and with weight loss, especially in the first 6 months of treatment, whereas paroxetine has been associated with the opposite effects (30). Bupropion, a noradrenaline-dopamine reuptake inhibitor, has been associated with effects on glycemia, TG levels, and weight similar to fluoxetine, and serotonin-noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors (venlafaxine, desvenlafaxine, duloxetine) and noradrenaline-serotonin specific agonists (mirtazapine) have been associated with effects on glycemia similar to paroxetine (30). We found essentially the same pattern of associations between ADM use and subsequent CVD risk factor-positive status for all ADMs and for non-TCA or tetracyclic ADMs. We found that the associations of depression symptoms and ADM use with CVD risk factors were independent of one another. Further, the design of the study, assessing depression indicators in the year prior to assessment of CVD, permitted us to draw inferences about directionality that are not possible in cross-sectional studies. In conclusion, among Look AHEAD participants, elevated self-reported depression symptoms and ADM use in the prior year were each independently associated with some but not all CVD risk factors during the first 4 years of the trial; significant associations for elevated risk were most consistent for ADM use. Importantly, Look AHEAD will permit examination of the relationships between depression indicators and actual CVD outcomes, providing a fuller picture of the depression-CVD outcome relationship. 