Glucose homeostasis is supported in a complex manner by the endocrine pancreas, which contains different cell types that respond metabolically to the circulating glucose concentration. Oppositely acting closed feedback loops of control have been identified between glucose and the hyperglycemic hormone glucagon on the one hand, and between glucose and the hypoglycemic hormone insulin on the other hand. The importance of this duality of secretion of both hormones was suggested by the idea that both lack of insulin and chronic hyperglucagonemia are needed to trigger overt diabetes (1). Although there is recent renewed interest in the pancreatic alpha-cell, the exact molecular and cellular mechanisms by which glucose inhibits glucagon secretion are still poorly understood and hotly debated. One area of discussion is whether glucose controls alpha-cell activity directly or indirectly through the other cell types in the islets of Langerhans (2). A direct effect of glucose on alpha-cells was first proposed as a result of studies on purified rat alpha-cells (3), but the underlying mechanisms are still disputed. The most documented hypothesis attributes a key role to ATP-sensitive K+(KATP) channels (4-6), which are highly expressed in alpha-cells, as in beta-cells, and possess the same subunit composition, i.e., the pore-forming subunit Kir6.2 and the sulfonylurea receptor SUR1 (7-9). In beta-cells, the closure of KATPchannels by acceleration of glucose metabolism depolarizes the plasma membrane, leading to opening of voltage-dependent Ca2+channels and to an increase of the free cytosolic Ca2+concentration ([Ca2+]c), which triggers insulin release. The alpha-cells possess a different equipment of voltage-dependent channels than do beta-cells. It has been proposed that at low glucose, the alpha-cell KATPcurrent is already small, and the plasma membrane is partially depolarized, displaying action potentials that involve voltage-dependent channels. Hence [Ca2+]cis high and glucagon secretion is stimulated. At high glucose, a further closure of KATPchannels depolarizes the plasma membrane to a potential at which low-threshold voltage-dependent channels inactivate, leading to a decreased amplitude of action potentials, Ca2+influx, and eventually exocytosis (4,5). This model is, however, challenged by some reports indicating that glucose hyperpolarizes rather than depolarizes the plasma membrane (7,10-12). Three other hypotheses of direct inhibition of alpha-cells by glucose suggest a glucose-induced control of a depolarizing store-operated current (10,13), a hyperpolarizing current carried by the Na+pump (14), or AMP-activated protein kinase (15). Another hypothesis of direct control proposes that glucose does not inhibit but rather stimulates alpha-cells by mechanisms similar to those present in beta-cells (8,16-18). 