Depression is associated with adverse CVD outcomes (3,4), likely via behavioral mechanisms (e.g., effects of cigarette smoking, and sedentary lifestyle and poor diet leading to obesity) and physiological mechanisms (e.g., effects of elevated blood glucose, blood pressure, and lipid levels, as well as dysregulation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis). In the Diabetes Prevention Program (DPP), ADM use was associated with increased risk of developing type 2 diabetes, raising the possibility that ADM use could lead to negative health outcomes in people with diabetes or at risk for the disease. Inclusion criteria for entry to the study were1) age 45-76 years;2) BMI greater than =25 kg/m2(27 kg/m2if currently taking insulin because thinner individuals taking insulin may be less responsive to weight loss); and3) glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1c) less than 11%, systolic blood pressure (SBP) less than 160 mmHg, diastolic blood pressure (DBP) less than 100 mmHg, and triglyceride (TG) less than 600 mg/dL. Exclusion criteria were1) underlying diseases or conditions likely to affect the safety of the interventions or factors that might limit adherence to the interventions or affect conduct of the trial, including hospitalization for depression in the past 6 months; suicidal ideation; current diagnosis of schizophrenia, other psychotic disorders, or bipolar disorder; or self-report of alcohol or substance abuse within the past 12 months; or2) other medical, psychiatric, or behavioral limitations (e.g., difficulty completing the 2-week run-in period during which participants were required to record food eaten) that in the judgment of the principal investigator might interfere with study participation or the ability to follow the protocol. Participants brought all prescription medicines to their assessment visits. Analyses included all randomized participants according to intervention assignment. The proportion of DSE and ILI participants with an elevated A1C level or taking insulin at some point in the study was 75.6 and 67.4%, respectively. We found little evidence for a temporal relationship between elevated depression symptoms and subsequent increases in positive CVD risk factor status. All CVD risk factor measures for which we found statistically significant associations with prior ADM use, except for HDL-cholesterol, have well documented associations with CVD morbidity and mortality. The literature on the effects of ADMs on CVD risk factors does not provide a clear explanation for our findings. We found that the associations of depression symptoms and ADM use with CVD risk factors were independent of one another. 