High maternal weight gain during pregnancy in women without diabetes increases the risk of excessive fetal growth (11), whereas low maternal gestational weight gain is associated with birth of small-for-gestational-age (SGA) infants and preterm birth (9). The inclusion criteria were as follows: type 2 diabetes, defined as diabetes diagnosed before pregnancy where the initial management was diet or oral antidiabetic drugs; referral before 22 gestational weeks with a singleton pregnancy; prepregnancy BMI greater than =30 kg/m2; and no concurrent diseases that could affect weight gain. We excluded 59 women due to BMI less than 30 kg/m2(n= 47), former bariatric surgery (n= 2), incomplete data in the medical records on weight gain during pregnancy (n= 8), and other prepregnancy medical problems (n= 2), leaving 58 participants. The women were weighed at each clinical visit, and their weight was used to reinforce the aim of restricted weight gain. Gestational weight gain was calculated as the difference between self-reported weight before pregnancy and the last weight measured before delivery. Proteinuria was defined as occurrence of one of the following: proteinuria greater than =300 mg/24 h, urine albumin excretion greater than =190 mg/24 h, proteinuria greater than or equal to +1 on a dipstick of sterile urine, or urine albumin-creatinine mass ratio greater than =190 mg/g. We designed a combined end point, perinatal morbidity, defined as the occurrence of at least one of the following complications: perinatal mortality, major congenital malformation, jaundice, TTN, neonatal hypoglycemia, or admission to neonatal special care unit (NSCU). Based on theoretical considerations, we included six possible confounders: prepregnancy BMI (kg/m2), smoking (yes vs. no), HbA1c(%) at last visit, Nordic Caucasian (yes vs. no), pre-eclampsia (yes vs. no), and nulliparity (yes. The median weight gain in the total cohort was 9.2 kg (range -4.7 to 25.5 kg); 17 women (29%) gained =5 kg with a median weight gain of 3.7 kg, and 41 (71%) gained 5 kg with a median weight gain of 12.1 kg (Table 2). Maternal characteristics at first visitMaternal HbA1c, urine ketone bodies, weight gain, and insulin treatment during pregnancyA gestational weight gain of less than =5 kg was significantly associated with a more proportionate birth weight with lower median birth weightzscore (-0.44 [range -3.31 to 1.98] vs. 0.84 [-2.32 to 4.02],P= 0.008) as well as a lower rate of LGA infants (P= 0.041) compared with those gaining greater than 5 kg during pregnancy (Table 3). Pregnancy-related outcomesIn the multiple linear regression analysis, a gestational weight gain of less than =5 kg was significantly associated with a lower birth weightzscore when adjusted for prepregnancy BMI, smoking, HbA1cat last visit, ethnicity, preeclampsia, and nulliparity, (beta = -0.978 [95% CI -1.831 to -0.126],P= 0.025), corresponding to a one SD lower birth weight. In this retrospective cohort study evaluating how the medical advice regarding restricting maternal weight gain to 0-5 kg during pregnancy in obese women with type 2 diabetes affects fetal growth and perinatal morbidity in an unselected cohort of patients, we found that those who gained 5 kg or less had infants with a more proportionate birth weight, represented by a smallerzscore, a lower proportion of LGA infants, and a marginally lower ponderal index. The presence of ketonemia in pregnant women has been associated with lower cerebral function in the offspring (12). Therefore, it is encouraging that the prevalence of women with morning ketonuria was very low and comparable in the two groups. Lower gestational weight gain in women with the highest pregestational BMI, as previously found in obese women without diabetes (15), was not present in our material, where women who gained less than =5 kg were less obese before their current pregnancy than those who gained more. We did not find an increased rate of SGA infants among women gaining less than =5 kg, and all these women received insulin treatment. In conclusion, we found that in obese women with type 2 diabetes, maternal gestational weight gain less than =5 kg was associated with a more proportionate birth weight and less perinatal morbidity without increased risk of SGA infants. 