Pregestational diabetes is associated with various pregnancy complications. Elevated maternal glucose crosses the placental barrier, leading to fetal hyperinsulinemia, which stimulates growth both directly and indirectly (3,4). High maternal weight gain during pregnancy in women without diabetes increases the risk of excessive fetal growth (11), whereas low maternal gestational weight gain is associated with birth of small-for-gestational-age (SGA) infants and preterm birth (9). Based on results from a study in obese women without diabetes (15), since 2008, the procedure in our clinic for pregnant women with diabetes has been to advise obese (BMI greater than =30 kg/m2) women with type 2 diabetes to gain 0-5 kg in total during pregnancy in an attempt to minimize the frequency of LGA infants. Additionally, we investigated whether it seems safe to advise this group of women to gain less than =5 kg regarding maternal health, including diabetes management, and pregnancy outcomes. Further, all women received both oral and written information advising them to gain between 0 and 5 kg body weight overall during pregnancy, with the main weight gain in the second half of pregnancy. Maternal characteristics at first visitMaternal HbA1c, urine ketone bodies, weight gain, and insulin treatment during pregnancyA gestational weight gain of less than =5 kg was significantly associated with a more proportionate birth weight with lower median birth weightzscore (-0.44 [range -3.31 to 1.98] vs. 0.84 [-2.32 to 4.02],P= 0.008) as well as a lower rate of LGA infants (P= 0.041) compared with those gaining greater than 5 kg during pregnancy (Table 3). In this retrospective cohort study evaluating how the medical advice regarding restricting maternal weight gain to 0-5 kg during pregnancy in obese women with type 2 diabetes affects fetal growth and perinatal morbidity in an unselected cohort of patients, we found that those who gained 5 kg or less had infants with a more proportionate birth weight, represented by a smallerzscore, a lower proportion of LGA infants, and a marginally lower ponderal index. Lower gestational weight gain in women with the highest pregestational BMI, as previously found in obese women without diabetes (15), was not present in our material, where women who gained less than =5 kg were less obese before their current pregnancy than those who gained more. 