In 2005, the American Diabetes Association Workgroup on Hypoglycemia released a report entitled "Defining and Reporting Hypoglycemia in Diabetes" (1). In that report, recommendations were primarily made to advise the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) on how hypoglycemia should be used as an end point in studies of new treatments for diabetes. In 2009, The Endocrine Society released a clinical practice guideline entitled "Evaluation and Management of Adult Hypoglycemic Disorders," which summarized how clinicians should manage hypoglycemia in patients with diabetes (2). Since then, new evidence has become available that links hypoglycemia with adverse outcomes in older patients with type 2 diabetes (3-6) and in children with type 1 diabetes (7,8). To provide guidance about how this new information should be incorporated into clinical practice, the American Diabetes Association and The Endocrine Society assembled a new Workgroup on Hypoglycemia in April 2012 to address the following questions:NoneNoneNoneNoneNoneHow should hypoglycemia in diabetes be defined and reported? What are the implications of hypoglycemia on both short- and long-term outcomes in people with diabetes? What are the implications of hypoglycemia on treatment targets for patients with diabetes? What strategies are known to prevent hypoglycemia, and what are the clinical recommendations for those at risk for hypoglycemia? What are the current knowledge gaps in our understanding of hypoglycemia, and what research is necessary to fill these gaps? Hypoglycemia puts patients at risk for injury and death. Consequently the workgroup defines iatrogenic hypoglycemia in patients with diabetes as all episodes of an abnormally low plasma glucose concentration that expose the individual to potential harm. A single threshold value for plasma glucose concentration that defines hypoglycemia in diabetes cannot be assigned because glycemic thresholds for symptoms of hypoglycemia (among other responses) shift to lower plasma glucose concentrations after recent antecedent hypoglycemia (9-12) and to higher plasma glucose concentrations in patients with poorly controlled diabetes and infrequent hypoglycemia (13). 