A potential therapeutic approach to replenish the pancreatic beta-cell mass in diabetic patients involves the transplantation of functional, glucose-responsive beta-cells differentiated from human pluripotent stem cells. Several attempts have been made at differentiating beta-cells in vitro from stem cells, with limited success, (1,2) because the insulin-expressing cells generated lack the characteristic hallmarks of functionally mature beta-cells, such as the ability to regulate glucose-stimulated insulin-secretion. Although many transcription factors and signaling pathways underlying the stepwise cell fate acquisition during beta-cell development are known (3-6), a complete understanding of the molecular basis of beta-cell specification and functional maturation is lacking. Of significant interest is the role of microRNAs (miRNAs) in regulating the pancreatic developmental program. miRNAs are non-protein-coding small RNAs (?19-25 nucleotides) that negatively regulate gene expression at the post-transcriptional level (7) and have been implicated as important regulators of animal development (8). Newly transcribed miRNAs undergo a series of processing steps that require the RNase III enzymes Drosha and Dicer1 before becoming functional (9,10). Although several miRNAs have been proposed to regulate beta-cell transcription factors during development (11), many of these computationally predicted miRNA-mRNA interactions have not been experimentally validated in vivo. The dysregulation of miRNAs throughDicer1ablation in the early embryonic pancreatic progenitor cells expressing Pdx-1 resulted in severe deficiencies in the formation of all islet cell lineages (12). More recently, it has been shown that deletion ofDicer1in beta-cells leads to loss of insulin expression and to development of diabetes in adult mice (13). Although these studies reveal key functions of miRNA-dependent pathways during early pancreatic development and in adult beta-cells, they preclude analysis of the role of miRNAs during the specification of endocrine cells and their functional maturation in postnatal life. In this study, we used a mouse model where expression of Cre recombinase directed by theNgn3promoter conditionally deleted floxedDicer1alleles in endocrine progenitor cells. 