We have also determined the association between laboratory-derived measures of glycemic control (HbA1c) and presence of renal complications (proteinuria and reduced eGFR) with the 5-year costs of caring for people with diabetes. Alberta Health data capture all health care utilization paid for through the provincial insurance plan. In patients greater than 65 years of age, two-thirds had filled a prescription for one or more oral antidiabetic medication at baseline (62.2%), and approximately one-fifth (17.4%) of patients were on insulin. These measurements revealed that 2.6% of the cohort had an eGFR 30, indicating severe renal impairment, 4.1% had heavy proteinuria, and 9.8% had inadequate glycemic control ( 9% HbA1c) (Table 1). When unadjusted costs were examined by level of glycemic control, we noted a similar pattern across all categories of cost (Table 4); those with good control cost less across all categories of health care spending. Ordinary least squares regression analysis examining the demographic, clinical, and laboratory factors associated with mean total 5-year costs per patient in people with diabetesThe mean 5-year cost of diabetes in Alberta was CDN $26,978 per patient, excluding drug costs, and CDN $44,511 per patient for patients 65 years of age, including drug costs. Although this study does not provide direct evidence that improvements in diabetes management would lead to cost reductions, our findings demonstrate a clear association between increased cost and suboptimal glycemic control and markers of kidney disease. Mean 5-year costs were lower in patients who were not on oral antidiabetic medications or insulin at baseline (in those greater than 65 years of age) and in patients who did not have laboratory testing during the 2 years prior to and 6 months past the index date. Our regression model included a "not measured" category for each laboratory marker, which is reflected in the adjusted cost estimates. In addition, although we found a strong association between glycemic control, proteinuria, and kidney function and costs, it is unknown whether improved management would in fact lead to a decrease in health care costs. 