Recent studies have shown that impaired mitochondrial function in the skeletal muscle may be involved in the pathogenesis of insulin resistance (5-7). These reports raise the possibility that systemic oxidative stress may contribute to lower aerobic capacity and skeletal muscle dysfunction in patients with MetS. In the current study, we tested the hypothesis that systemic oxidative stress is associated with lower aerobic capacity and impaired skeletal muscle energy metabolism in patients with MetS. After at least 30 min rest, high-energy phosphate metabolism in the calf muscle was measured during plantar flexion exercise in supine position on the original apparatus equipped with a 1.5-Tesla whole-body scanner system (Magnetom Vision VB33G; Siemens, Erlangen, Germany) using31P-MRS, as previously described (10). IMCL content in the resting tibialis anterior muscle at the level of the muscle belly of calf was measured by proton (1H)-MRS on a 1.5-Tesla whole-body scanner system (Signa Horizon LX; GE Medical Systems, Milwaukee, WI), as previously described (10). Statistical analysis was performed using StatView software (SAS Institute, Inc., Cary, NC), andP less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant. Fasting blood glucose, plasma insulin, HOMA-IR, HbA1c, and triglycerides were significantly elevated, and HDL cholesterol was significantly decreased in patients with MetS (Table 1). In addition, there was an inverse correlation between muscle PCr loss and peakVO2(r= -0.49;P less than 0.01) or AT (r= -0.51;P less than 0.01) normalized to body weight in all subjects by linear regression analysis, indicating that impairment in intramuscular high-energy phosphate metabolism was associated with the lower aerobic capacity in MetS. Patients with MetS had significantly higher systemic lipid peroxidation products and lower systemic antioxidant defense capacity, including serum total thiols and SOD activity compared with age-, sex-, and activity-matched healthy subjects, indicating enhanced systemic oxidative stress in MetS. Therefore, decreased serum total thiols and SOD activity may contribute to the enhanced systemic oxidative stress in patients with MetS. 