The critical contribution of deficient insulin secretion to the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes is beyond doubt (1-3). The normal beta-cell response to excess nutrient and obesity-associated insulin resistance is hypersecretion of insulin that maintains blood glucose levels within the normal range. This is associated with both expansion of beta-cell mass and enhanced beta-cell function such that the amount of insulin secreted per given unit of beta-cell mass is increased (2,3). Normoglycemia can be maintained for decades in obese subjects with robust beta-cells that cope with this increased demand and sustain the compensatory response. Mechanisms for beta-cell compensation have been proposed (2,3), but there has been little exploratory investigation. Type 2 diabetes only develops in subjects unable to sustain the beta-cell compensatory response. This is associated with a progressive deterioration of beta-cell function, particularly impairment of glucose-stimulated insulin secretion (GSIS), and a loss of beta-cell mass through an increased rate of apoptosis (1-5). Thus, type 2 diabetes arises in subjects with islets that are susceptible to dysfunction and apoptosis under stressful conditions. The current knowledge of the molecular differences between robust and susceptible beta-cells is poor. Thedb/dbandob/obmouse models of obesity have been cornerstones in research of the mechanisms of insulin resistance and beta-cell failure (6,7). In these models, the absence of leptin signaling results in similar hyperphagia, obesity, hyperlipidemia, and insulin resistance. However, opposing predisposition to diabetes development is displayed by these mice when bred on the C57BL/6J or C57BL/KsJ background. Theob/obmouse on the C57BL/6J background strain exhibits resistance to diabetes because of successful beta-cell compensation, whereas thedb/dbmouse on the C57BL/KsJ background strain displays time-dependent progression to overt diabetes because of the failure of beta-cell compensation. The differences in beta-cell phenotype (propensity to compensation or failure) are revealed only in the setting of obesity and insulin resistance. We have used these mouse models of obesity with opposing disposition to development of diabetes to study the mechanisms of beta-cell compensation (diabetes-resistantob/obmice) and failure (diabetes-pronedb/dbmice). 