However, just combining the results of risk engines specific to each vascular complication may yield biased estimates of absolute risks since it is likely that each engine was developed independently, and a correlation between incidences of vascular complications is not accounted for in the development process. The aim of the current study was therefore to develop and validate an algorithm that separately calculates each risk of the first occurrence for five events: fatal and nonfatal CHD, fatal and nonfatal stroke, noncardiovascular mortality, overt nephropathy, and progression of retinopathy. The disease states and transitions assumed in the multistate model are detailed inSupplementary Data. By the UKPDS risk engine, more than half of patients had a macrovascular risk of 10% or more (249 of the 376 cases and 697 of the 1,372 noncases), as expected by the tendency of overestimation The sensitivity and specificity of the UKPDS risk engine with a cutoff value of 10% risk were 66.2 and 49.2%, respectively. Risk classification of the 1,748 patients according to 5-year risks of macrovascular disease based on the JJ risk engine and the UKPDS risk engineTable 4shows how the combination of 5-year risks of macro- and microvascular complications based on the JJ risk engine classified low-risk and high-risk patients. Risk classification of the 1,748 patients according to 5-year risks of macro- and microvascular diseases based on the JJ risk engineTo illustrate the use of the JJ risk engine, consider two Japanese men 60 years of age with simple diabetic retinopathy and without atrial fibrillation who do not have smoking and exercise habits. In contrast, the UKPDS risk engine overestimated CHD risk, and this tendency is consistent with a previous report in Asian patients (18). Although the prevalence of micro- or macroalbuminuria in Asian hypertensive diabetes is alarmingly high (36), most of the progression to overt nephropathy occurs in a small fraction of patients with elevated HbA1cand SBP values and a smoking habit (12). Combining macro- and microvascular risks resulted in the net reclassification improvement of 5.7% (P= 0.02) and a sensitivity and specificity of 46.3 and 75.4%, respectively; only 16.5% of cases were classified as the high-risk population for macro- and microvascular diseases and only 43.8% of noncases were in the low-risk population (Table 4). We also found that the UKPDS risk engine overestimated CHD risk (Table 2) and the C statistic of the JJ risk engine (0.725) was slightly higher than that of the risk equation of the HKDR (0.704) (18), indicating that the JJ risk engine may outperform the previously developed risk engines for the prediction of CHD. Prior to pooling the datasets, we compared important clinical factors between patients in the two trials and found no notable differences except for age; therefore, pooling of the datasets was considered to be valid. 