The clinical uses of liver DW-MRI include improved detection of focal liver lesions, contribution to tissue characterization for both diffuse disease and focal lesions, monitoring of tumour response after chemotherapy or radiotherapy, detection of recurrent disease, differentiating recurrence from post-therapeutic change, and potentially predicting treatment outcome. By contrast, cellular tissues (e.g. With growing equalization of technology across MR vendor platforms, there is now a significant convergence in the implementation of DW-MRI across different scanners. Although conventional computed tomography (CT) and MRI can identify patients with advanced liver cirrhosis, the evaluation of early hepatic fibrosis and inflammation is impossible with conventional MRI, and newer sequences such as DW-MRI and MR elastography are currently under evaluation. Table 2summarizes published papers utilizing DW-MRI for the assessment of liver fibrosis. Hence, further lesion characterization by DW-MRI could be aided by evaluating the ADC map in conjunction with the morphologic sequences. [None]suggests that minimum ADC could be useful in detecting poorly differentiated components of the tumour and that application of an ADC cut-off at 0.972 * 10-3 mm2 s-1distinguished moderately to poorly and poorly differentiated HCCs with a sensitivity of 73.1% and specificity of 72.9%. In cirrhotic liver, HCC (arrows) typically (a) demonstrates hyperenhancement in the arterial phase of low molecular weight Gd contrast-enhanced imaging; (b) appears relatively hypointense to liver in the portovenous or interstitial phase of contrast enhancement (washout) and (c) shows impeded diffusion on diffusion-weighted imaging (b = 500 s mm-2). Measurement reproducibility obtained from normal tissues may not be applicable to diseased states because disease tissues are typically more heterogeneous, which results in poorer measurement reproducibility compared with normal tissues[None]. Although DW-MRI has been used for the evaluation of liver fibrosis, the sensitivity of the technique to early fibrosis appears limited, and more research is needed to optimize the measurement reproducibility of quantitative parameters derived by IVIM analysis before they can be robustly and meaningfully deployed in the clinical arena. 