The treatment of pregnant women with type 2 diabetes tends to focus on achieving euglycemia, before, during, and after pregnancy (8). Since January 2008, all obese pregnant women with type 2 diabetes attending our clinic have been advised to gain 0-5 kg body weight during pregnancy. All 117 pregnant women with type 2 diabetes giving birth at our center during January 2008 to October 2011 were included in this retrospective cohort study. The inclusion criteria were as follows: type 2 diabetes, defined as diabetes diagnosed before pregnancy where the initial management was diet or oral antidiabetic drugs; referral before 22 gestational weeks with a singleton pregnancy; prepregnancy BMI greater than =30 kg/m2; and no concurrent diseases that could affect weight gain. Further, all women received both oral and written information advising them to gain between 0 and 5 kg body weight overall during pregnancy, with the main weight gain in the second half of pregnancy. Maternal characteristics at first visitMaternal HbA1c, urine ketone bodies, weight gain, and insulin treatment during pregnancyA gestational weight gain of less than =5 kg was significantly associated with a more proportionate birth weight with lower median birth weightzscore (-0.44 [range -3.31 to 1.98] vs. 0.84 [-2.32 to 4.02],P= 0.008) as well as a lower rate of LGA infants (P= 0.041) compared with those gaining greater than 5 kg during pregnancy (Table 3). In this retrospective cohort study evaluating how the medical advice regarding restricting maternal weight gain to 0-5 kg during pregnancy in obese women with type 2 diabetes affects fetal growth and perinatal morbidity in an unselected cohort of patients, we found that those who gained 5 kg or less had infants with a more proportionate birth weight, represented by a smallerzscore, a lower proportion of LGA infants, and a marginally lower ponderal index. Lower gestational weight gain in women with the highest pregestational BMI, as previously found in obese women without diabetes (15), was not present in our material, where women who gained less than =5 kg were less obese before their current pregnancy than those who gained more. However, because there were only two women who delivered preterm in the group who gained less than =5 kg, we do not consider the bias crucial for the outcome of this study. 