From the renal perspective, we have shown that women with uncomplicated type 1 DM exhibit an augmented renal pressor response to hyperglycemia compared with men, with decreases in renal blood flow (RBF) and effective renal plasma flow (ERPF) and an increase in filtration fraction (FF), suggesting increased efferent renal arteriolar constriction (2). Accordingly, our aim was to determine ifl-arginine, which is the substrate for NO synthase, would reverse sex-dependent renal hemodynamic and blood pressure differences in the response to clamped hyperglycemia in patients with uncomplicated type 1 DM. Inclusion criteria were: duration of type 1 DM =5 years; age 18 years or older; blood pressure 140/90 mmHg; normoalbuminuria on 24-h urine collection; and no history of renal disease or macrovascular disease or regular medications other than insulin, including oral contraceptives. Baseline characteristics and biochemistryTo maintain suppression of endogenous renin-angiotensin system (RAS) activity, subjects adhered to a high-sodium ( 140 mmol/day) and moderate-protein ( 1.5 g/kg per day) diet during the 7-day period before each experiment, as described previously (5). On 2 consecutive days, brachial artery blood pressure (Critikon, Tampa, FL) and renal hemodynamic parameters were obtained after a 6-h modified clamp during clamped euglycemia (day 1, 4-6 mmol/L) and hyperglycemia (day 2, 9-11 mmol/L) (5). On the hyperglycemic day, after baseline blood pressure, renal and plasma cGMP measurements were obtained,l-arginine (Clinalpha, Laufelfingen, Switzerland) was administered at incremental low and moderate doses (100 mg/kg over 30 min and then 250 mg/kg over 30 min) to probe renal hemodynamic effects without confounding systemic hypotensive effects associated with higher doses (6-12). Renal function and circulating cGMP measurements were assessed at the end of eachl-arginine infusion period, as described in previous experiments (6). To have an 80% power to detect a 10 mL/min/1.73 m2between-group difference in the GFR response hyperglycemia, for a two-sided test withP= 0.05 and with Zalpha= 1.96, the sample size should equal 14 in each group. Hemodynamic responses to a graded infusion ofl-arginine during clamped hyperglycemia in men and women with type 1 diabetesIn response tol-arginine infusion during hyperglycemia, the increase in cGMP was exaggerated in women versus men at the 250 mg/kg dose (Fig. For renal hemodynamic parameters, in response tol-arginine during clamped hyperglycemia, GFR and FF decreased in women only, back toward baseline values observed during clamped euglycemia, although GFR remained numerically higher at the end of the hyperglycemicl-arginine infusion compared with the euglycemic baseline (P= not significant). cGMP declined in both groups afterl-NMMA (P less than = 0.004) and nadir cGMP levels were similar in men versus women (3.67 +/- 0.41 pmol/L vs. 3.89 +/- 0.51 pmol/L;P= 0.74 for between-group effect). l-NMMA infusion did not significantly augment the hypertensive and renal effects of clamped hyperglycemia in women compared with men. We observed that expected increases in GFR and FF in response to clamped hyperglycemia were associated with exaggerated declines in cGMP in women. This finding suggests that exaggerated hyperglycemia-induced renal effects observed in DM women are partly related to a decline in NO bioactivity (3). In a cohort of hyperfiltering (GFR greater than =135 mL/min/1.73 m2) patients with type 1 DM, we recently demonstrated that NO inhibition withl-NMMA during clamped euglycemia leads to modest declines in GFR and more important suppression of ERPF and cGMP, consistent with dominant preglomerular vasoconstrictive effects observed in animals (13,32). In contrast, our first major observation in the current study was that clamped hyperglycemia alone led to significant increases in FF and GFR and a decline in cGMP with minimal ERPF effects in women, suggesting a dominant postglomerular decline in NO bioavailability. Whenl-NMMA was administered during clamped hyperglycemia, our findings suggested that NO bioactivity was already maximally suppressed by hyperglycemia in the postglomerular circulation and the decline in ERPF (Delta-168 +/- 22 in men vs. Delta-187 +/- 28 mL/min/1.73 m2in women) and increase in RVR may have instead reflected preglomerular vasoconstriction. Our second major observation was thatl-arginine reduced GFR and FF in women only, back toward values observed during clamped euglycemia. In conclusion, our results suggest that NO bioactivity may contribute to the exaggerated renal effects of hyperglycemia in women with type 1 DM. 