Lower aerobic capacity is one of the strongest and independent predictors of all-cause mortality in subjects with obesity and insulin resistance (2,3), and it is essential to improve lower aerobic capacity in the treatment of MetS. Recent studies have shown that impaired mitochondrial function in the skeletal muscle may be involved in the pathogenesis of insulin resistance (5-7). In the current study, we tested the hypothesis that systemic oxidative stress is associated with lower aerobic capacity and impaired skeletal muscle energy metabolism in patients with MetS. To monitor the level of physical activity during daily life, daily steps and movement-related calorie consumption were measured for at least 1 week by using a pedometer with an accelerometry sensor (Lifecorder Plus; Suzuken, Nagoya, Japan), as previously described (10). After at least 30 min rest, high-energy phosphate metabolism in the calf muscle was measured during plantar flexion exercise in supine position on the original apparatus equipped with a 1.5-Tesla whole-body scanner system (Magnetom Vision VB33G; Siemens, Erlangen, Germany) using31P-MRS, as previously described (10). Phosphocreatine (PCr) was standardized as [PCr]/([PCr] + [Pi]) on the basis of the notion that [PCr] + [Pi] is constant at rest and during exercise, in which [PCr] indicates concentration of PCr, and [Pi] indicates concentration of inorganic phosphate (Pi). Enzymatic activity of SOD and GPx was measured by fluorometric analysis, as previously described (20). Data are expressed as means +/- SD. Moreover, to determine the association between oxidative stress and aerobic capacity of a large effect size (i.e.,r= 0.5), a sample size of total 27 subjects was needed to yield efficient power (1-beta = 0.8) based on alpha = 0.05. Fasting blood glucose, plasma insulin, HOMA-IR, HbA1c, and triglycerides were significantly elevated, and HDL cholesterol was significantly decreased in patients with MetS (Table 1). As a result, muscle PCr loss during exercise was greater in patients with MetS (Table 2). In addition, there was an inverse correlation between muscle PCr loss and peakVO2(r= -0.49;P less than 0.01) or AT (r= -0.51;P less than 0.01) normalized to body weight in all subjects by linear regression analysis, indicating that impairment in intramuscular high-energy phosphate metabolism was associated with the lower aerobic capacity in MetS. 1None). 1NoneandNone). 2). PeakVO2normalized to body weight inversely correlated with serum TBARS; however, it did not correlate with systemic antioxidant defense capacity including total thiols and SOD activity (Fig. 2None). There were also relationships between skeletal muscle energy metabolism and some indices of systemic oxidative stress (Fig. Therefore, decreased serum total thiols and SOD activity may contribute to the enhanced systemic oxidative stress in patients with MetS. Recent large clinical trials have demonstrated that systemic oxidative stress is related to insulin resistance and obesity (15,16), which is consistent with our results that there were tight correlations between serum TBARS and insulin resistance markers such as FBS, insulin level, or free fatty acid level (Supplementary Fig. Because fatty acids are particularly prone to oxidative damage, lipid peroxidation products are easily formed in the skeletal muscle under the condition of increased ROS production, which can cause mitochondrial damage and subsequently decrease capacity for fatty acid oxidation (29). It has been demonstrated that weight loss induced by diet and exercise therapy improves insulin resistance and reduces biomarkers of systemic oxidative stress in patients with MetS (35). In summary, we demonstrated for the first time that systemic oxidative stress including higher levels of lipid peroxidation and lower antioxidant defense capacity was related to lower aerobic capacity and impaired skeletal muscle energy metabolism in patients with MetS. 