Inclusion criteria for entry to the study were1) age 45-76 years;2) BMI greater than =25 kg/m2(27 kg/m2if currently taking insulin because thinner individuals taking insulin may be less responsive to weight loss); and3) glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1c) less than 11%, systolic blood pressure (SBP) less than 160 mmHg, diastolic blood pressure (DBP) less than 100 mmHg, and triglyceride (TG) less than 600 mg/dL. Each of nine elements of five CVD risk factors was dichotomized into risk-positive and not. First-order Markov models were used to parameterize intrasubject longitudinal correlations and were fitted using generalized estimating equations (20); higher order models were deemed unnecessary based on Wald tests. In the DSE arm, only two associations with elevated BDI reached nominal statistical significance: the odds (95% CI) of elevated A1C/insulin use were increased (1.03 [1.09-1.56]) and the odds of elevated TC/medicine use were decreased if BDI was elevated in the prior year. We found that depression markers (elevated depression symptom scores or ADM use) during the prior year were associated with current elevated CVD risk factors in both Look AHEAD intervention arms when prior risk factor status and other covariates were controlled. We assessed CVD risk factors in the five domains of glycemia, lipids, blood pressure, smoking, and BMI, all of which are well-documented risk factors for CVD morbidity and mortality (21-25). Bupropion, a noradrenaline-dopamine reuptake inhibitor, has been associated with effects on glycemia, TG levels, and weight similar to fluoxetine, and serotonin-noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors (venlafaxine, desvenlafaxine, duloxetine) and noradrenaline-serotonin specific agonists (mirtazapine) have been associated with effects on glycemia similar to paroxetine (30). The ancillary analysis that controlled for weight change during the study provides additional insight into the possible effects of elevated depression symptoms and ADM use on CVD risk factor status. Although the clinical relevance of the associations we report is difficult to assess, we found a dramatic increase of 24 to greater than 50% in the odds of positive status for some CVD risk factors in study participants who had elevated depression symptoms or who were taking an ADM in the preceding year. In conclusion, among Look AHEAD participants, elevated self-reported depression symptoms and ADM use in the prior year were each independently associated with some but not all CVD risk factors during the first 4 years of the trial; significant associations for elevated risk were most consistent for ADM use. 