The interplay between lipids and insulin action has been the focus in diabetes research for several years. Importantly, exercise leads to increased insulin sensitivity (1,2) and oxidation of fatty acids (FAs) (3) in skeletal muscle. However, by which mechanisms FA oxidation is regulated by muscle contractions remains unsolved. Based on the original observations that the AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) activating substance 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide riboside (AICAR) increased FA oxidation in perfused rat skeletal muscle (4) and the finding that exercise increases AMPK activity in muscle (5,6), it was originally thought that AMPK plays an important role in enhancing FA oxidation during exercise. In contrast, it was recently reported that FA oxidation during treadmill running was not decreased in muscle-specific AMPK beta1beta2 knockout mice (7) or during contractions ex vivo in muscle overexpressing a dominant negative AMPK construct (8). Also, women have higher FA oxidation but lower AMPK activity during submaximal exercise than men (9). Liver kinase B1 (LKB1) is upstream of AMPK and a family of 12 other Ser/Thr kinases closely related to AMPK, which would potentially be regulated by LKB1 in vivo in skeletal muscle. These include sucrose nonfermenting AMPK-related kinase (SNARK) (10,11) and salt-inducible kinase (SIK)1 and -3 (12,13). Recently, the LKB1-regulated kinase SIK3 was inDrosophilashown to regulate FOXO activity by modulating its deacetylation by histone deacetylase (HDAC)4 (14). In skeletal muscle, FOXO1 activity was increased with fasting (15), which increased pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 4-mediated inactivation of pyruvate dehydrogenase, resulting in increased FA oxidation (16,17). Furthermore, when FOXO1 activity was genetically increased in C2C12 myotubes, this markedly upregulated FA oxidation (18). Thus, it could be hypothesized that LKB1 might be involved in regulation of FA oxidation in muscle as well. Interestingly, deletion of LKB1 resulted in blunted AICAR-induced increase in FA oxidation in isolated extensor digitorum longus (EDL) mouse muscle (19). This is in contrast to EDL muscle overexpressing a dominant negative AMPKalpha2 isoform in which the AICAR effect on FA oxidation was normal (8). 