In pregnant women without diabetes, obesity is associated with complications such as perinatal mortality and LGA/macrosomia, the risk rising with rising prepregnancy BMI (9,10). Based on results from a study in obese women without diabetes (15), since 2008, the procedure in our clinic for pregnant women with diabetes has been to advise obese (BMI greater than =30 kg/m2) women with type 2 diabetes to gain 0-5 kg in total during pregnancy in an attempt to minimize the frequency of LGA infants. All women had a 1-h tailored dietary consultation concerning the diabetes diet, which was supplemented with educational handouts to aid learning. If a woman presented with ketonuria, her plasma glucose and carbohydrate intake were evaluated. Proteinuria was defined as occurrence of one of the following: proteinuria greater than =300 mg/24 h, urine albumin excretion greater than =190 mg/24 h, proteinuria greater than or equal to +1 on a dipstick of sterile urine, or urine albumin-creatinine mass ratio greater than =190 mg/g. Birth weightzscore is a measure of how far in SDs the birth weight deviates from the mean of a standard Nordic population, adjusted for gestational age and sex (16). Macrosomia was defined as birth weight greater than =4,000 g.Perinatal mortality was fetal death later than 22 weeks of gestation or death within 1 week of delivery. We designed a combined end point, perinatal morbidity, defined as the occurrence of at least one of the following complications: perinatal mortality, major congenital malformation, jaundice, TTN, neonatal hypoglycemia, or admission to neonatal special care unit (NSCU). According to Danish law, the protocol did not need approval from the regional ethics committees as the study was a register study without biological material and medical intervention. The median weight gain in the total cohort was 9.2 kg (range -4.7 to 25.5 kg); 17 women (29%) gained =5 kg with a median weight gain of 3.7 kg, and 41 (71%) gained 5 kg with a median weight gain of 12.1 kg (Table 2). Nearly all women were insulin treated from early pregnancy, but significantly less insulin was needed in the group of women gaining less than =5 kg (Table 2). Maternal characteristics at first visitMaternal HbA1c, urine ketone bodies, weight gain, and insulin treatment during pregnancyA gestational weight gain of less than =5 kg was significantly associated with a more proportionate birth weight with lower median birth weightzscore (-0.44 [range -3.31 to 1.98] vs. 0.84 [-2.32 to 4.02],P= 0.008) as well as a lower rate of LGA infants (P= 0.041) compared with those gaining greater than 5 kg during pregnancy (Table 3). In this retrospective cohort study evaluating how the medical advice regarding restricting maternal weight gain to 0-5 kg during pregnancy in obese women with type 2 diabetes affects fetal growth and perinatal morbidity in an unselected cohort of patients, we found that those who gained 5 kg or less had infants with a more proportionate birth weight, represented by a smallerzscore, a lower proportion of LGA infants, and a marginally lower ponderal index. The cases of malformation and perinatal mortality were reviewed. From our study, we cannot conclude which level of weight gain should be recommended for obese women with type 2 diabetes, but our data point toward a negligible gain in the first half of pregnancy and a gain of about 150 g per week in the second. The prevalence of LGA infants is comparable to that in other studies (20). This study is limited by its retrospective nature and small sample size, giving it a character of a pilot study. As far as we are aware, no dietary intervention studies targeting weight-gain restriction have been performed in obese pregnant women with type 2 diabetes; accordingly, randomized clinical trials are needed to evaluate the effect of weight-gain restriction in this population. 