In the Diabetes Prevention Program (DPP), ADM use was associated with increased risk of developing type 2 diabetes, raising the possibility that ADM use could lead to negative health outcomes in people with diabetes or at risk for the disease. Inclusion criteria for entry to the study were1) age 45-76 years;2) BMI greater than =25 kg/m2(27 kg/m2if currently taking insulin because thinner individuals taking insulin may be less responsive to weight loss); and3) glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1c) less than 11%, systolic blood pressure (SBP) less than 160 mmHg, diastolic blood pressure (DBP) less than 100 mmHg, and triglyceride (TG) less than 600 mg/dL. Twenty-one percent of those using ADMs at baseline stopped taking them during follow-up. In the DSE arm, only two associations with elevated BDI reached nominal statistical significance: the odds (95% CI) of elevated A1C/insulin use were increased (1.03 [1.09-1.56]) and the odds of elevated TC/medicine use were decreased if BDI was elevated in the prior year. ORs for CVD risk factor-positive status with ADM use or BDI greater than =11 the preceding year, controlled for risk factor status in the prior yearIn the DSE cohort, ADM use in the prior year was associated with more prevalent low HDL/medicine use (1.20 [1.03-1.50]), elevated TC/medicine use (1.29 [1.05-1.57]), and current smoking (1.70 [1.04-2.88]). We found that depression markers (elevated depression symptom scores or ADM use) during the prior year were associated with current elevated CVD risk factors in both Look AHEAD intervention arms when prior risk factor status and other covariates were controlled. Overall, there were more significant associations of CVD risk factors with ADM use than with depression symptoms. Findings on the association between TCA use and BP levels are mixed (30-32). Thus, the ORs that we report express the degree to which current CVD risk factor status is associated with prior markers of depression beyond what would be predicted by prior risk factor status alone. The ancillary analysis that controlled for weight change during the study provides additional insight into the possible effects of elevated depression symptoms and ADM use on CVD risk factor status. Moreover, most CVD risk factors were assessed objectively rather than relying on self-reporting. 