At the renal microvascular level, we have demonstrated that clamped hyperglycemia is associated with renal hyperfiltration responses in women but not in men (2). In brief, a 16-gauge peripheral venous cannula was inserted into the left antecubital vein for infusion of glucose and insulin, and a second cannula was inserted for blood sampling more distally. After collecting blood for inulin and PAH blank, a priming infusion containing 25% inulin (60 mg/kg) and 20% PAH (8 mg/kg) was administered. In response to clamped hyperglycemia, cGMP levels did not change in men but did decline in women, and the between-group effect of hyperglycemia on cGMP was significant (Fig. 2). The effect ofl-arginine on plasma cGMP during clamped hyperglycemia in men and women with uncomplicated type 1 DM (mean +/- SD). *P= 0.001 for the cGMP level during clamped hyperglycemia compared with clamped euglycemia in women. Also, in women, administration ofl-arginine reduced GFR and FF but not SBP, back toward values observed during clamped euglycemic conditions. The goal of the current study was to determine if NO synthase activation withl-arginine would reverse sex-dependent renal hemodynamic and blood pressure differences in the response to clamped hyperglycemia in type 1 DM patients. We observed that expected increases in GFR and FF in response to clamped hyperglycemia were associated with exaggerated declines in cGMP in women. In contrast, our first major observation in the current study was that clamped hyperglycemia alone led to significant increases in FF and GFR and a decline in cGMP with minimal ERPF effects in women, suggesting a dominant postglomerular decline in NO bioavailability. Unfortunately, segmental resistances cannot be assessed in human studies of whole organ function and should be further clarified in animal models. During clamped hyperglycemia, however,l-arginine increased cGMP but did not influence blood pressure. In conclusion, our results suggest that NO bioactivity may contribute to the exaggerated renal effects of hyperglycemia in women with type 1 DM. 