In fact, in the U.S., the prevalence of obesity (BMI greater than =30 kg/m2) among transplant recipients at the time of kidney transplantation doubled between 1987 and 2001 (13). There is a five- to sixfold higher incidence of new-onset of diabetes mellitus among transplant recipients during the first year after transplantation than among patients who remain on the transplant waiting list, with a decline after the first year to an annual incidence of 4-6% (3) (Fig. Figure 2describes the pathogenesis of NODAT. The diabetogenic effects of CNIs are attributed to both increased insulin resistance and impaired insulin secretion (18,19). Suggested pathogenic mechanisms of sirolimus-induced hyperglycemia include impaired insulin-mediated suppression of hepatic glucose production, deposition of ectopic triglycerides leading to insulin resistance, and direct pancreatic beta-cell toxicity. Although useful in population studies, neither the OGTT nor the homeostasis model assessment of insulin resistance, derived from concentrations of fasting glucose and insulin, may adequately mirror the altered carbohydrate metabolism of individuals with chronic kidney disease (CKD) or ESRD. In the Finnish Diabetes Prevention Study, a similar lifestyle intervention had almost identical effects, reducing the incidence rate of diabetes by 58% (41). Recent studies suggest that it is higher muscle mass, rather than higher fat mass, that predicts longer survival in dialysis patients (48,49). Thus, an intervention aimed at increasing muscle mass while decreasing fat mass before transplantation may decrease the incidence of NODAT and some complications, including wound infections and development of delayed graft function (50), and may confer improved allograft and patient survival (51); however, clinical trials are needed to test this hypothesis. Patients receiving chronic hemodialysis have lower physical activity on dialysis days than nondialysis days, and a majority of the reduced activity is explained by less movement recorded during dialysis treatment (53). After transplantation, metformin or pioglitazone may be prescribed for treatment of pre-existing type 2 diabetes mellitus or NODAT in patients with good allograft function (60). With the rise in obesity among patients waiting for a kidney transplant and an anticipated increase in the number of patients with NODAT, safe and effective interventions to reduce the incidence of NODAT are critically needed. 