Behavioral mechanisms may activate physiological mechanisms. In the Diabetes Prevention Program (DPP), ADM use was associated with increased risk of developing type 2 diabetes, raising the possibility that ADM use could lead to negative health outcomes in people with diabetes or at risk for the disease. Each of nine elements of five CVD risk factors was dichotomized into risk-positive and not. First-order Markov models were used to parameterize intrasubject longitudinal correlations and were fitted using generalized estimating equations (20); higher order models were deemed unnecessary based on Wald tests. In the DSE arm, only two associations with elevated BDI reached nominal statistical significance: the odds (95% CI) of elevated A1C/insulin use were increased (1.03 [1.09-1.56]) and the odds of elevated TC/medicine use were decreased if BDI was elevated in the prior year. We assessed CVD risk factors in the five domains of glycemia, lipids, blood pressure, smoking, and BMI, all of which are well-documented risk factors for CVD morbidity and mortality (21-25). All CVD risk factor measures for which we found statistically significant associations with prior ADM use, except for HDL-cholesterol, have well documented associations with CVD morbidity and mortality. The ancillary analysis that controlled for weight change during the study provides additional insight into the possible effects of elevated depression symptoms and ADM use on CVD risk factor status. Although the clinical relevance of the associations we report is difficult to assess, we found a dramatic increase of 24 to greater than 50% in the odds of positive status for some CVD risk factors in study participants who had elevated depression symptoms or who were taking an ADM in the preceding year. In conclusion, among Look AHEAD participants, elevated self-reported depression symptoms and ADM use in the prior year were each independently associated with some but not all CVD risk factors during the first 4 years of the trial; significant associations for elevated risk were most consistent for ADM use. 