Depression is associated with adverse CVD outcomes (3,4), likely via behavioral mechanisms (e.g., effects of cigarette smoking, and sedentary lifestyle and poor diet leading to obesity) and physiological mechanisms (e.g., effects of elevated blood glucose, blood pressure, and lipid levels, as well as dysregulation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis). Behavioral mechanisms may activate physiological mechanisms. Our specific aim was to determine whether elevated depression symptoms or ADM use were independently associated with subsequent elevated CVD risk factors over trial years 1-4, controlled for baseline characteristics of age, sex, race/ethnicity, education, history of CVD, and diabetes duration, as well as CVD risk factor status in the prior year. Depression measures and CVD risk factor-positive status by timeThe proportion of participants with an elevated A1C level or taking insulin, as well as the proportion with a BMI greater than =30 kg/m2, differed substantially between intervention groups. We also conducted a series of ancillary analyses that confirmed the robustness of our original models (results not shown): First, repeating the analyses using continuous BDI scores rather than a dichotomous classification did not change the direction or statistical significance of any relationships with CVD risk factors. Third, when we repeated the analyses excluding participants who took TCA or tetracyclic ADMs, the results were nearly identical to analyses involving individuals taking any ADM.Fourth, we repeated the analyses controlled for weight change during the study. Bupropion, a noradrenaline-dopamine reuptake inhibitor, has been associated with effects on glycemia, TG levels, and weight similar to fluoxetine, and serotonin-noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors (venlafaxine, desvenlafaxine, duloxetine) and noradrenaline-serotonin specific agonists (mirtazapine) have been associated with effects on glycemia similar to paroxetine (30). In the current study, about 80% of participants who were taking ADMs were taking non-TCAs or tetracyclic ADMs. The ancillary analysis that controlled for weight change during the study provides additional insight into the possible effects of elevated depression symptoms and ADM use on CVD risk factor status. Although the clinical relevance of the associations we report is difficult to assess, we found a dramatic increase of 24 to greater than 50% in the odds of positive status for some CVD risk factors in study participants who had elevated depression symptoms or who were taking an ADM in the preceding year. In conclusion, among Look AHEAD participants, elevated self-reported depression symptoms and ADM use in the prior year were each independently associated with some but not all CVD risk factors during the first 4 years of the trial; significant associations for elevated risk were most consistent for ADM use. 