Depression is associated with adverse CVD outcomes (3,4), likely via behavioral mechanisms (e.g., effects of cigarette smoking, and sedentary lifestyle and poor diet leading to obesity) and physiological mechanisms (e.g., effects of elevated blood glucose, blood pressure, and lipid levels, as well as dysregulation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis). Literature suggests that antidepressant medicines (ADMs) may also affect CVD risk factors and outcomes either negatively or positively. Findings on the association between other widely used ADMs, such as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and serotonin-noradrenaline (norepinephrine) reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs), and cardiovascular outcomes are mixed. Here we assessed the temporal dynamics of elevated depression symptoms and ADM use with selected CVD risk factors during the first 4 years of Look AHEAD. Our specific aim was to determine whether elevated depression symptoms or ADM use were independently associated with subsequent elevated CVD risk factors over trial years 1-4, controlled for baseline characteristics of age, sex, race/ethnicity, education, history of CVD, and diabetes duration, as well as CVD risk factor status in the prior year. Inclusion criteria for entry to the study were1) age 45-76 years;2) BMI greater than =25 kg/m2(27 kg/m2if currently taking insulin because thinner individuals taking insulin may be less responsive to weight loss); and3) glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1c) less than 11%, systolic blood pressure (SBP) less than 160 mmHg, diastolic blood pressure (DBP) less than 100 mmHg, and triglyceride (TG) less than 600 mg/dL. Exclusion criteria were1) underlying diseases or conditions likely to affect the safety of the interventions or factors that might limit adherence to the interventions or affect conduct of the trial, including hospitalization for depression in the past 6 months; suicidal ideation; current diagnosis of schizophrenia, other psychotic disorders, or bipolar disorder; or self-report of alcohol or substance abuse within the past 12 months; or2) other medical, psychiatric, or behavioral limitations (e.g., difficulty completing the 2-week run-in period during which participants were required to record food eaten) that in the judgment of the principal investigator might interfere with study participation or the ability to follow the protocol. The following assessments were completed annually:The Central Biochemistry Laboratory (Northwest Lipid Research Laboratories, University of Washington, Seattle, WA) conducted standardized analyses of HbA1c, fasting serum glucose, total serum cholesterol (TC), LDL cholesterol, HDL cholesterol, and TG in frozen samples (14). The primary objective of this report was to assess the association between elevated depression symptoms or ADM use and subsequent CVD risk factor-positive status. Risk factor-positive status was defined as current smoking, BMI greater than =30 kg/m2, HbA1c greater than 7.0%, SBP greater than 130 mmHg, DBP greater than 80 mmHg, LDL greater than =100 mg/dL, HDL less than =40 mg/dL, TC greater than =200 mg/dL, and TG greater than =150 mg/dL, as recommended by the American Diabetes Association (16) or the Expert Panel on Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood and Cholesterol in Adults (17), or taking medicine to achieve these targets (18,19). However, 85.3% had BDI scores less than 11 (median 8; 25th-75th percentile, 6-9), reflecting that many individuals with severe depression symptoms resulting in hospitalization or inability to successfully complete the run-in period were excluded from Look AHEAD participation (12). Of the participants taking ADMs, 73% took SSRIs, SNRIs, or serotonin modulators, 28% took norepinephrine-dopamine reuptake inhibitors, and 23% took TCA or tetracyclic agents at some point during the 4-year follow-up. The proportion of participants with elevated BDI scores who were taking ADMs was 5.7, 7.2, 8.6, and 9.5% in years 1, 2, 3, and 4, respectively, in the DSE arm and 6.2, 7.9, 9.1, and 9.8%, respectively, in the ILI arm. ORs for CVD risk factor-positive status with ADM use or BDI greater than =11 the preceding year, controlled for risk factor status in the prior yearIn the DSE cohort, ADM use in the prior year was associated with more prevalent low HDL/medicine use (1.20 [1.03-1.50]), elevated TC/medicine use (1.29 [1.05-1.57]), and current smoking (1.70 [1.04-2.88]). In the ILI cohort, ADM use in the prior year was associated with more prevalent elevated A1C/insulin use (1.25 [1.08-1.46]), low HDL/medicine use (1.33 [1.11- 1.58]), elevated TC/medicine use (1.75 [1.43-2.14]), elevated SBP/medicine use (1.39 [1.11-1.74]), and BMI greater than =30 kg/m2(1.47 [1.22-1.76]). Future research should assess these mechanisms:First, individuals taking ADMs may have had a history of more severe, chronic, or recurrent depression. Bupropion, a noradrenaline-dopamine reuptake inhibitor, has been associated with effects on glycemia, TG levels, and weight similar to fluoxetine, and serotonin-noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors (venlafaxine, desvenlafaxine, duloxetine) and noradrenaline-serotonin specific agonists (mirtazapine) have been associated with effects on glycemia similar to paroxetine (30). The longitudinal design included assessment of depression indicators and CVD risk factors at multiple time points, enhancing the robustness of the findings. Another limitation is that we did not confirm that all patients took ADMs because of depression rather than for other indications, such as smoking cessation, neuropathic pain, or other psychiatric conditions, including panic disorder, social anxiety disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder, and post-traumatic stress disorder (33). Although the clinical relevance of the associations we report is difficult to assess, we found a dramatic increase of 24 to greater than 50% in the odds of positive status for some CVD risk factors in study participants who had elevated depression symptoms or who were taking an ADM in the preceding year. These results are consistent with the hypothesis of a potential causal link between ADM use and worsening of some CVD risk factors. 