In general, the quality of liver DW-MRI seems to be more consistent at 1.5 T compared with 3.0 T, although many institutions are now adopting the 3.0 T imaging platform for liver imaging because of the high-quality T1-weighted dynamic contrast-enhanced imaging that can be achieved at the higher field strength. Quantification of tissue diffusivity is performed using ADC maps, which can be evaluated visually or by drawing regions of interest on the ADC map to generate mean ADC values for the tissue/region of interest. In 2 studies, decrease in hepatic perfusion was cited as a reason because decreased liver perfusion fraction was observed in the cirrhotic liver, measured using multiplebvalue DW-MRI and analysed using the principles of intravoxel incoherent motion (IVIM)[None,None]. Theb = 750 s mm-2image shows an irregular liver outline, which also returns higher signal intensity compared with normal liver due to impeded water diffusion. Application of a small diffusion weighting (b less than 50-150 s mm-2) nulls the intrahepatic vascular signal resulting in black-blood images that improve the detection of focal liver lesions while maintaining a high SNR (Fig. Improvement in lesion detection with DW-MRI can be explained by improved lesion to background image contrast using lowbvalue (or black-blood) images, which helps to differentiate small metastases from intrahepatic vasculature[None]. When DW-MRI was performed after the administration of superparamagnetic iron oxide contrast medium, lesion detection was also improved by suppression of background liver signal[None]. (b) The lesion shows persistent high signal on the highb-value image (b = 750 s mm-2), due to the long T2 relaxation time (T2 shine-through). Consensus recommendations suggest that the omission ofb = 0 and calculation using a range of higher and lowerbvalues[None]may be practical to avoid measurement uncertainty that may arise from variations in the flow-sensitive components of the diffusion measurements. In patients with colorectal hepatic metastases, mean lesional ADC values have been shown to increase in response to chemotherapy in those patients showing at least a partial response[None,None], reflecting a reduction in tissue cellular density and barriers to water movement. 