Congenital hyperinsulinism (CHI) is the major cause of severe and persistent hypoglycemia in neonates and infants and is a brain-damaging and potentially life-threatening condition (1-3). Excessive secretion of insulin by pancreatic beta-cells has been linked to mutations in several genes. Most cases are caused by inactivating mutations inABCC8(encoding sulfonylurea receptor 1) orKCNJ11(encoding Kir6.2) (4,5), the two subunits of ATP-sensitive K (KATP) channels that mediate the effects of glucose on beta-cell membrane potential (6,7). Histologically, two forms of KATPchannel-related CHI have been identified (8,9). In diffuse forms inherited in an autosomal-recessive (rarely dominant) manner, all beta-cells in all islets are affected, and subtotal pancreatectomy may be necessary. In focal forms, a localized adenomatous hyperplasia of abnormal beta-cells is present in an otherwise normal pancreas, and its selective resection cures the patient (10,11). One important clinical feature of KATPchannel-related CHI patients is their usual resistance to medical treatment with diazoxide (1-3). In vitro studies of islets or pancreatic fragments from operated patients have verified the following predictable consequences of this lack of functional KATPchannels in beta-cells: membrane depolarization; uncontrolled influx of Ca2+; increase in the cytosolic concentration of free Ca2+; and high rate of insulin secretion at low glucose levels (12-14). They further showed that drugs acting on KATPchannels are unable to produce their normal stimulatory (tolbutamide) or inhibitory (diazoxide) effects on insulin secretion (14). Less often CHI is caused by activating mutations inGCK(encoding glucokinase),GLUD1(encoding glutamate dehydrogenase), orSLC16A1(encoding monocarboxylate transporter 1) or by inactivating mutations inHADH(encoding 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase),UCP2(encoding mitochondrial uncoupling protein 2),HNF4A(encoding HNF4alpha), orHNF1A(encoding HNF1alpha) (15-21). It is unclear how mutations inHNF4AandHNF1Aalter beta-cell function. 