tumours) with more impeded water diffusion tend to maintain their signal at higherbvalues ( greater than 500 s mm-2). Visual assessment of DW-MR images is useful in disease detection and lesion characterization based on differential signal attenuation within tissues. Several studies have shown that the cirrhotic liver is associated with lower ADC values than normal liver parenchyma (Fig. NoneNoneNoneNoneNoneNoneNoneStudies comparing DWI with T2-weighted imaging for the detection of focal liver lesionsStudies comparing DWI with contrast-enhanced MRI for the detection of focal liver lesionsDTPA, diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid; EOB, ethoxybenzyl; Mn-DPDP, mangafodipir trisodium; SPIO, superparamagnetic iron oxide; TSE, turbo spin-echo. Compared with T2-weighted MRI, the use of lowbvalues to generate black-blood images has been shown to result in comparable image quality but improved lesion detection[None,None,None], particularly for lesions less than or equal to 1 cm in diameter[None], for lesions lying adjacent to blood vessels and for those located in the right hepatic lobe[None]. In cirrhotic liver, HCC (arrows) typically (a) demonstrates hyperenhancement in the arterial phase of low molecular weight Gd contrast-enhanced imaging; (b) appears relatively hypointense to liver in the portovenous or interstitial phase of contrast enhancement (washout) and (c) shows impeded diffusion on diffusion-weighted imaging (b = 500 s mm-2). However, there was a 37% increase in the mean ADC value (pre-treatment ADC = 1.49 * 10-3 mm2 s-1; post-treatment ADC = 2.05 * 10-3 mm2 s-1) within the tumour after treatment in keeping with treatment response. As more studies are being conducted to assess the measurement reproducibility within and between MR imaging systems, it is clear that in a well-conducted study in which there is sufficient image SNR and minimal image artefact, mean ADC measurements have good reproducibility using the free-breathing fat-suppressed echo-planar spin-echo DW-MRI technique. There is currently considerable interest in using a bi-exponential model by applying the principles of IVIM to the evaluation of the liver and focal liver disease. For example, studies have shown that using IVIM analysis, cirrhotic liver shows a lower perfusion fraction and pseudodiffusion coefficient. 