Findings on the association between other widely used ADMs, such as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and serotonin-noradrenaline (norepinephrine) reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs), and cardiovascular outcomes are mixed. In 2010 we reported that among participants in the Look AHEAD (Action for Health in Diabetes) clinical trial, depression symptoms and ADM use on entry to the study were each independently associated with a wide range of CVD risk factors (12). Their personal physicians provided medical care for all participants. Inclusion criteria for entry to the study were1) age 45-76 years;2) BMI greater than =25 kg/m2(27 kg/m2if currently taking insulin because thinner individuals taking insulin may be less responsive to weight loss); and3) glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1c) less than 11%, systolic blood pressure (SBP) less than 160 mmHg, diastolic blood pressure (DBP) less than 100 mmHg, and triglyceride (TG) less than 600 mg/dL. Weight and height were measured in duplicate using a digital scale and stadiometer. We assessed the association that positive status for each CVD risk factor had with elevated BDI scores and ADM use in the prior year, controlled for CVD risk factor status of interest in the prior year, participant characteristics of age, sex, race, education, history of cardiovascular disease, and duration of diabetes, and year of follow-up. Thirteen percent of participants not using ADMs at baseline took them at some point during the 4-year follow-up. Of those with elevated BDI scores at baseline, 81% had a score below the cutoff of 11 at some point during follow-up. The proportion of DSE and ILI participants with a BMI greater than 30 kg/m2was 90.8 and 86.9%, respectively. In the DSE arm, only two associations with elevated BDI reached nominal statistical significance: the odds (95% CI) of elevated A1C/insulin use were increased (1.03 [1.09-1.56]) and the odds of elevated TC/medicine use were decreased if BDI was elevated in the prior year. Six of eight associations (all but the association with smoking in the DSE arm and low HDL/medicine in the ILI arm) that were significant in the primary analysis were also significant in the analysis controlled for weight change. Overall, there were more significant associations of CVD risk factors with ADM use than with depression symptoms. Although depression-screening tools like the BDI have acceptable psychometric properties for detecting major depressive disorder, they often yield high rate of false-positive results (8). We found essentially the same pattern of associations between ADM use and subsequent CVD risk factor-positive status for all ADMs and for non-TCA or tetracyclic ADMs. An analysis using log-transformed BDI scores also generated results very similar to our main analysis, as did tests for interactions of age with BDI scores and ADM use. Future studies of the relationship between depression indicators and CVD events will provide a more definitive picture of effects on overall CVD risk. This information was not collected. 