We previously reported that Japanese patients have a markedly low prevalence of obesity and low incidence rates of overt nephropathy and diabetic retinopathy (10-13). However, just combining the results of risk engines specific to each vascular complication may yield biased estimates of absolute risks since it is likely that each engine was developed independently, and a correlation between incidences of vascular complications is not accounted for in the development process. The aim of the current study was therefore to develop and validate an algorithm that separately calculates each risk of the first occurrence for five events: fatal and nonfatal CHD, fatal and nonfatal stroke, noncardiovascular mortality, overt nephropathy, and progression of retinopathy. This was done by fitting a multistate Cox regression model (28), an extension of the Cox model to multiple time-to-event end points, to the pooled data from these trials. Design of the JDCS and the J-EDIT has been described in detail elsewhere (26,27). The present analysis excluded patients who had any history of angina pectoris, myocardial infarction, stroke, peripheral artery disease, familial hypercholesterolemia (diagnosed clinically by markedly elevated LDL cholesterol levels with enlarged Achilles tendons and/or family history of premature coronary artery disease), type III hyperlipidemia (diagnosed by broad beta-band on electrophoresis), nephrotic syndrome, serum creatinine levels greater than 1.3 mg/dL (120 mumol/L), mean values of two spot urine examinations for an albumin excretion rate of 150 mg/g creatinine (17.0 mg/mmol) or more, microscopic hematuria, or other clinical findings indicating other renal diseases, preproliferative and proliferative retinopathy, and major ocular disease (e.g., glaucoma, dense cataract, or history of cataract surgery). Leisure-time physical activity (LTPA) was also assessed at baseline by a self-administered questionnaire, which was almost identical to that used and validated in the Health Professionals' Follow-up Study (30). LDL cholesterol levels were calculated using the Friedewald formula, that is, NHDL-C subtracted by triglycerides divided by 5 if triglyceride levels are less than 400 mg/dL (4.48 mmol/L); otherwise, LDL cholesterol levels were treated as missing data. A nephropathy event was defined as the development of overt nephropathy (spot urinary albumin excretion greater than 33.9 mg/mmol creatinine in two consecutive samples) (12). The JDCS/J-EDIT (JJ) risk engine calculates each risk of the first occurrence within a user-specified time point for the five events described above. The occurrences of these events are viewed as transitions between disease states and were modeled by a multistate model that follows the Markov renewal process (28). Calibration, namely, how closely the prediction reflected observed events, was assessed for each event by the Hosmer-Lemeshow test and the mean of observed-to-predicted (O/P) ratios, which was calculated as the mean of ratios of the observed-to-expected events across the strata used in the Hosmer-Lemeshow test. All analyses were conducted by the central data center with the use of SAS software version 9.2 (SAS Institute, Cary, NC). Of the 866 patients who had retinopathy or developed retinopathy after baseline, 113 (13.0%) had progression to retinopathy of stage 3 or 4. The backward variable selection procedure identified 11 baseline risk factors for macro- and microvascular complications and noncardiovascular mortality. HRs of risk factors incorporated in the best-fitting multistate Cox regression modelThe performance of the JJ risk engine was evaluated by several validation criteria. Risk classification of the 1,748 patients according to 5-year risks of macrovascular disease based on the JJ risk engine and the UKPDS risk engineTable 4shows how the combination of 5-year risks of macro- and microvascular complications based on the JJ risk engine classified low-risk and high-risk patients. His leading risk is estimated to be the progression of retinopathy (5-year risk, 15.5%), and his macrovascular risks are moderate (9.2% for CHD and 9.6% for stroke). The other patient has an SBP of 180 mmHg. Combining macro- and microvascular risks resulted in the net reclassification improvement of 5.7% (P= 0.02) and a sensitivity and specificity of 46.3 and 75.4%, respectively; only 16.5% of cases were classified as the high-risk population for macro- and microvascular diseases and only 43.8% of noncases were in the low-risk population (Table 4). We also found that the UKPDS risk engine overestimated CHD risk (Table 2) and the C statistic of the JJ risk engine (0.725) was slightly higher than that of the risk equation of the HKDR (0.704) (18), indicating that the JJ risk engine may outperform the previously developed risk engines for the prediction of CHD. With regard to lifestyle factors, we identified LTPA as a risk factor for stroke and noncardiovascular mortality, although the statistical significance was borderline. Prior to pooling the datasets, we compared important clinical factors between patients in the two trials and found no notable differences except for age; therefore, pooling of the datasets was considered to be valid. These factors were included as inputs into the HKDR all-cause mortality risk score (19), and peripheral arterial disease is a clinically relevant cardiovascular outcome. 