Extensive preclinical evidence suggests additive and/or synergistic effects in solid tumour models when a variety of chemotherapies, including gemcitabine, are combined with targeted agents, including sunitinib (YeeNone, 2004;CarterNone, 2007;ChristensenNone, 2008), as demonstrated in a recently reported phase I trial of sunitinib on a continuous daily dosing schedule plus gemcitabine in patients with advanced solid tumours (BrellNone, 2012). Patients were excluded if previously treated with gemcitabine or sunitinib; had severe/unstable angina, myocardial infarction, symptomatic congestive heart failure, cerebrovascular accident, or transient ischaemic attack within the previous 12 months; National Cancer Institute Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (NCI CTCAE, version 3.0) grade 3 haemorrhage within 4 weeks of study entry; uncontrolled hypertension; uncontrolled brain metastases; and a second malignancy diagnosis within the last 5 years. Provision was made for dose reduction if patients experienced drug-related toxicities. For gemcitabine and dFdU PK profiles, blood samples were drawn pre-dose and up to 9 h after the start of infusion on cycle 1, days 1 and 22 (with sunitinib on Schedule 4/2) or on cycle 1, days 1 and 8 (with sunitinib on Schedule 2/1). The sunitinib dose was interrupted in 25 patients and reduced in 12 patients across all cohorts. The gemcitabine dose was not modified in any patients. The most common grade 3 or 4 haematological toxicities related to sunitinib plus gemcitabine treatment in patients on Schedule 2/1, post-amendment, were neutropenia (n=13), leucopenia (n=8), and lymphopenia and thrombocytopenia (bothn=7). Our results indicate that oral sunitinib given on Schedule 2/1 combined with IV gemcitabine given on days 1 and 8, with each agent at the maximum individual approved dose, has a favourable safety profile. The study design was modified on Schedule 2/1 to allow growth factor support during cycle 1. In contrast, increases in grade 3 or higher non-haematological toxicity were reported for the combination of sunitinib plus erlotinib in a phase III trial of NSCLC (ScagliottiNone, 2012). This treatment regimen has promising antitumor activity, surpassing that shown in the earlier gemcitabine phase I combination trial, in which 4 of 33 patients had a PR (BrellNone, 2012). 