Regular exercise confers numerous health benefits, including reduced risk of developing type 2 diabetes (1,2) and lowering blood glucose in people with diabetes, partly due to an increase in the rate of glucose transport into the skeletal muscles and elevating insulin sensitivity in the postexercise period (3-6). Despite the clinical importance of the metabolic effects of exercise, the underlying molecular mechanisms that mediate these responses remain unclear. Exercise and insulin are the most important physiological stimuli to increase glucose transport into skeletal muscle fibers (5,7). Each stimulus results in redistribution of GLUT4 from the muscle cell interior to surface membranes, which ultimately leads to a larger glucose transport rate into the muscle cell (8-10). The proposed mechanisms through which a single bout of physical exercise increases glucose transport in skeletal muscle involve intracellular signal transduction that is distinct from that of insulin (5,11). The putative exercise-derived signals have long been elusive, but a need for intracellular Ca2+below the threshold needed to evoke contraction was early recognized (12,13). AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) has been proposed as a mediator of insulin-independent glucose transport in skeletal muscle (14-16). Although AMPK is a master regulator of metabolic and transcriptional functions in tissues and cells throughout the body during exercise (17), its role in contraction-stimulated glucose transport has been questioned (18,19). We previously reported that tetanic electrical stimulation of skeletal myotubes evokes a fast Ca2+transient related to excitation-contraction coupling (20) and a slow Ca2+transient, within seconds of stimulus initiation (21), that was not related to excitation-contraction coupling (22). The fast transient arises from Ca2+release from ryanodine-sensitive stores, whereas the slow component is Ca2+released through inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor (IP3R) (21,23) and depends on ATP concomitantly released from the stimulated cells (24). ATP signals in skeletal muscle through P2Y and P2* purinergic receptors (24), G-protein-coupled receptors that typically signal through the betagamma subunits to activate phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-gamma (PI3Kgamma) (21). We therefore hypothesized that extracellular ATP may signal through PI3Kgamma and further downstream to Akt. Because Akt phosphorylation is a key regulator of GLUT4 traffic, ATP may ultimately stimulate glucose uptake through this transporter. Here we describe that in primary and L6 myotubes as well as in adult muscle fibers, electrical stimulation and ATP indeed signal through PI3Kgamma downstream to Akt and its substrate AS160 and mobilize GLUT4 to the surface via Rab8-mediated exocytosis and decreased endocytosis to increase glucose uptake. ATP, ADP, UTP, and apyrase grade VII from potato, suramin, cytosine arabinoside, penicillin-streptomycin, nifedipine, and amphotericin B were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). 