Numerous studies have investigated the biological impact of variations in fasting blood glucose (FBG) levels in humans. Elevated FBG has been shown to be associated with increased risk for the development of type 2 diabetes (1). In addition, a number of studies have found that even mild variations in FBG can have significant consequences on the risk of cardiovascular-associated mortality (CAM). For example, a study performed on a European male population demonstrated that a small increase in FBG levels from just 90 mg/dL to between 99 and 108 mg/dL was associated with a 30% increase in the risk of CAM (2). Conversely, a study performed in an Asian population found that a reduction in FBG levels from 99 to 90 mg/dL was associated with a 25% reduction in CAM (3). The risk of CAM increases still further in individuals with the very high FBG levels characteristic of diabetes (2-5). Because of the apparent biological importance of tightly regulating FBG levels, there has been tremendous interest in understanding how this parameter is controlled. Recent genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have shed light on this question by demonstrating that single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within the humanG6PC2gene are associated with variations in FBG (6,7). These GWAS data are consistent with the observation that global deletion ofG6pc2in mice on a mixed 129SvEv * C57BL/6J genetic background results in a ?15% reduction in FBG levels compared with wild-type (WT) littermates (8). These observations raise the key question as to how G6pc2 modulates FBG. G6PC2, formerly known asIGRP, is primarily expressed in islet beta-cells and encodes a glucose-6-phosphatase catalytic subunit isoform that catalyzes the hydrolysis of glucose-6-phosphate (G6P) to produce glucose and inorganic phosphate within the endoplasmic reticulum lumen (9,10). Historically, the biological purpose and even existence of glucose-6-phosphatase activity in islets has been highly controversial (9,11,12). Although there is now general agreement that glucose-6-phosphatase activity is present in pancreatic islets, the issue as to whether the level of activity is enough to result in significant glucose cycling and hence affect glycolytic flux and glucose-stimulated insulin secretion (GSIS) and, therefore, be of physiological significance has remained unclear (13,14). 