We previously reported that Japanese patients have a markedly low prevalence of obesity and low incidence rates of overt nephropathy and diabetic retinopathy (10-13). Given the overestimation of risks of coronary heart disease (CHD) and stroke in Chinese patients by the UK Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS) risk engine (17,18), risk engines for non-Asian populations may not be transportable to Asian patients. The aim of the current study was therefore to develop and validate an algorithm that separately calculates each risk of the first occurrence for five events: fatal and nonfatal CHD, fatal and nonfatal stroke, noncardiovascular mortality, overt nephropathy, and progression of retinopathy. LDL cholesterol levels were calculated using the Friedewald formula, that is, NHDL-C subtracted by triglycerides divided by 5 if triglyceride levels are less than 400 mg/dL (4.48 mmol/L); otherwise, LDL cholesterol levels were treated as missing data. A nephropathy event was defined as the development of overt nephropathy (spot urinary albumin excretion greater than 33.9 mg/mmol creatinine in two consecutive samples) (12). The JDCS/J-EDIT (JJ) risk engine calculates each risk of the first occurrence within a user-specified time point for the five events described above. Of the 866 patients who had retinopathy or developed retinopathy after baseline, 113 (13.0%) had progression to retinopathy of stage 3 or 4. The backward variable selection procedure identified 11 baseline risk factors for macro- and microvascular complications and noncardiovascular mortality. By the UKPDS risk engine, more than half of patients had a macrovascular risk of 10% or more (249 of the 376 cases and 697 of the 1,372 noncases), as expected by the tendency of overestimation The sensitivity and specificity of the UKPDS risk engine with a cutoff value of 10% risk were 66.2 and 49.2%, respectively. His leading risk is estimated to be the progression of retinopathy (5-year risk, 15.5%), and his macrovascular risks are moderate (9.2% for CHD and 9.6% for stroke). The other patient has an SBP of 180 mmHg. We also found that the UKPDS risk engine overestimated CHD risk (Table 2) and the C statistic of the JJ risk engine (0.725) was slightly higher than that of the risk equation of the HKDR (0.704) (18), indicating that the JJ risk engine may outperform the previously developed risk engines for the prediction of CHD. These factors were included as inputs into the HKDR all-cause mortality risk score (19), and peripheral arterial disease is a clinically relevant cardiovascular outcome. 