Extensive preclinical evidence suggests additive and/or synergistic effects in solid tumour models when a variety of chemotherapies, including gemcitabine, are combined with targeted agents, including sunitinib (YeeNone, 2004;CarterNone, 2007;ChristensenNone, 2008), as demonstrated in a recently reported phase I trial of sunitinib on a continuous daily dosing schedule plus gemcitabine in patients with advanced solid tumours (BrellNone, 2012). The primary objective was to assess the MTD and overall safety and tolerability of sunitinib administered in combination with gemcitabine in patients with advanced solid tumours. Fifty per cent or more of patients were on treatment for more than 6 months at all dose levels, except the lowest (sunitinib 37.5 mg plus 750 mg m-2). Two of eleven patients (18%) on Schedule 2/1, pre-amendment, had DLTs at the dose level of sunitinib 37.5 mg+gemcitabine 750 mg m-2(appendicitis/abscess and QTc prolongation). Non-haematological treatment-related AEs included: grade 4 uric acid elevation (n=2), hypertension, pulmonary embolism, and cerebrovascular accident (n=1 each), grade 3 elevation of amylase (n=2) or lipase (n=1), hypertension, pericardial effusion, leukoencephalopathy, nausea, mucosal inflammation, hypophosphatemia, and hypomagnesemia (eachn=1). Plasma PK parameters and geometric mean ratios for subjects with paired observations for sunitinib, SU12662, total drug, gemcitabine and dFdU, as a single agent or in combination, are summarised for all dose levels combined inTable 4(plasma concentration time curves for patients on Schedule 2/1 are shown inSupplementary Figure 1). Among 25 patients on Schedule 2/1, post amendment, PRs were observed in 7 patients across the full range of doses: two with pancreatic carcinoma and five with RCC. The study design was modified on Schedule 2/1 to allow growth factor support during cycle 1. In the earlier phase I trial with gemcitabine, growth factor support was excluded and the recommended phase II dose was gemcitabine 675 mg m-2on days 1 and 8 and sunitinib 25 mg on continuous daily dosing (BrellNone, 2012). Phase II studies of this combination in patients with RCC or pancreatic cancer are underway. 