In the Diabetes Prevention Program (DPP), ADM use was associated with increased risk of developing type 2 diabetes, raising the possibility that ADM use could lead to negative health outcomes in people with diabetes or at risk for the disease. Our specific aim was to determine whether elevated depression symptoms or ADM use were independently associated with subsequent elevated CVD risk factors over trial years 1-4, controlled for baseline characteristics of age, sex, race/ethnicity, education, history of CVD, and diabetes duration, as well as CVD risk factor status in the prior year. Their personal physicians provided medical care for all participants. Inclusion criteria for entry to the study were1) age 45-76 years;2) BMI greater than =25 kg/m2(27 kg/m2if currently taking insulin because thinner individuals taking insulin may be less responsive to weight loss); and3) glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1c) less than 11%, systolic blood pressure (SBP) less than 160 mmHg, diastolic blood pressure (DBP) less than 100 mmHg, and triglyceride (TG) less than 600 mg/dL. Weight and height were measured in duplicate using a digital scale and stadiometer. Of the participants taking ADMs, 73% took SSRIs, SNRIs, or serotonin modulators, 28% took norepinephrine-dopamine reuptake inhibitors, and 23% took TCA or tetracyclic agents at some point during the 4-year follow-up. Thirteen percent of participants not using ADMs at baseline took them at some point during the 4-year follow-up. The proportion of DSE and ILI participants with an elevated A1C level or taking insulin at some point in the study was 75.6 and 67.4%, respectively. In the DSE arm, only two associations with elevated BDI reached nominal statistical significance: the odds (95% CI) of elevated A1C/insulin use were increased (1.03 [1.09-1.56]) and the odds of elevated TC/medicine use were decreased if BDI was elevated in the prior year. ORs for CVD risk factor-positive status with ADM use or BDI greater than =11 the preceding year, controlled for risk factor status in the prior yearIn the DSE cohort, ADM use in the prior year was associated with more prevalent low HDL/medicine use (1.20 [1.03-1.50]), elevated TC/medicine use (1.29 [1.05-1.57]), and current smoking (1.70 [1.04-2.88]). Six of eight associations (all but the association with smoking in the DSE arm and low HDL/medicine in the ILI arm) that were significant in the primary analysis were also significant in the analysis controlled for weight change. Overall, there were more significant associations of CVD risk factors with ADM use than with depression symptoms. We note that elevated depression screening scores are often more reflective of general emotional distress than major depressive disorder (27), and in patients with diabetes, they may reflect diabetes-related distress (28). We found essentially the same pattern of associations between ADM use and subsequent CVD risk factor-positive status for all ADMs and for non-TCA or tetracyclic ADMs. This information was not collected. 