Cardiovascular disease is the leading cause of mortality in diabetic patients (1,2). Whereas coronary vessel disease and atherosclerosis have been identified as the primary reasons for the increased incidence of diabetic cardiovascular dysfunction (3), a significant number of diabetic patients continue to experience left ventricular dysfunction even in the absence of coronary artery disease or hypertension (4-6). This cardiac dysfunction is referred to as diabetic cardiomyopathy (4-6). Although the causes are multifactorial, the initiating event that contributes to the development of diabetic cardiomyopathy appears to be an early maladaptation in cardiac energy metabolism (7-9) attributable to early onset of intramyocardial lipid accumulation that occurs secondary to altered substrate supply and utilization (10,11). However, the involvement of intramyocardial lipid accumulation in the pathogenesis of diabetic cardiomyopathy has not been clearly defined. Under normal aerobic conditions, cardiomyocyte ATP is obtained via oxidation of various substrates, including fatty acids (FAs), glucose, lactate, and ketone bodies (12), with FA being the primary energy substrates utilized by the heart. Because the heart has limited potential to synthesize FA, exogenous FAs are supplied to cardiomyocytes via three distinct pathways, all of which are sensitive to insulin inhibition. These pathways include triacylglycerol (TAG) hydrolysis in adipose tissue with an ensuing increase in albumin-bound FA in the plasma (12), hydrolysis of TAG in circulating lipoproteins by lipoprotein lipase (9,13,14), and hydrolysis of TAG stores within cardiomyocytes (15,16). During diabetes, the lack of insulin action results in inadequate myocardial glucose transport and oxidation, thereby relieving insulin's inhibition of FA supply and utilization (8,15). Furthermore, diabetes augments intramyocardial FA availability and oxidation, which promotes pathological TAG accumulation within the cardiomyocyte (17,18). The majority of previous studies have primarily investigated how FA uptake and oxidation influences the progression of diabetic cardiomyopathy (19). However, the role that TAG catabolism plays in influencing metabolism and function during the development of diabetic cardiomyopathy is currently unknown. 