Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) is an increasing health concern in the U.S., and it is projected that the prevalence of this disease could exceed 13% in adults greater than 20 years of age by the year 2021 (1). The year 4 outcomes of the Look AHEAD Trial, which were reported recently, demonstrated the effects of an intensive lifestyle intervention (ILI) compared with a diabetes support and education (DSE) intervention on weight loss and CVD risk factors, where weight loss was significantly greater in ILI compared with DSE (3). Among participants who had fitness data measured at the year 4 visit, we compared the two treatment groups (ILI and DSE) on the distributions of selected baseline characteristics using the generalized linear model implemented in PROC GLM. The difference in percent fitness change between ILI and DSE observed at year 4 was significant after adjustment for baseline fitness (5.40 vs. -0.83%;P less than 0.0001), change in weight (3.62 vs. 1.03%;P= 0.001), or both baseline fitness and change in weight (3.70 vs. 0.94%;P less than 0.001). Data were analyzed to examine if change in glycemic control, measured by HbA1c, was influenced by fitness improvement, with fitness change categorized as described above. 3). Post hoc analysis showed that there was a significant difference for change in HbA1cbetween subjects grouped as having a greater than 10% increase in fitness and both subject groups as having a greater than 10% decline in fitness (P less than 0.0001) and a 0-10% decline in fitness (P less than 0.0001) at 4 years, with these comparisons remaining significant when data were analyzed separately for DSE and ILI. Additional data presented here show that ILI was more effective than DSE at increasing fitness even after adjustment for baseline fitness and change in weight. The contribution of fitness to improving glycemic control, and the finding that ILI resulted in greater improvements in fitness compared with DSE, may be of particular importance in the Look AHEAD Trial, where the primary research question is to compare CVD outcomes in response to ILI compared with DSE. Fitness measures were obtained from 76.6% of the randomized sample, and there are differences in baseline demographic characteristics between subjects providing and not providing fitness data. These results demonstrated an association between change in fitness and improvements in glycemic control, expressed as HbA1c, even after controlling for weight loss in both ILI and DSE. 