In 2 studies, decrease in hepatic perfusion was cited as a reason because decreased liver perfusion fraction was observed in the cirrhotic liver, measured using multiplebvalue DW-MRI and analysed using the principles of intravoxel incoherent motion (IVIM)[None,None]. From these studies, the mean ADC values measured on DW-MRI seem to have a limited range to distinguish early stages of fibrosis (e.g. Application of a small diffusion weighting (b less than 50-150 s mm-2) nulls the intrahepatic vascular signal resulting in black-blood images that improve the detection of focal liver lesions while maintaining a high SNR (Fig. The use of higherbvalues ( greater than 500 s mm-2) facilitates liver lesion characterization, helping to distinguish between cystic and solid lesions[None,None]. However, differentiation between different solid lesions is difficult based on visual assessment because these lesions, whether benign or malignant, demonstrate impeded diffusion on the highbvalue images. Improvement in lesion detection with DW-MRI can be explained by improved lesion to background image contrast using lowbvalue (or black-blood) images, which helps to differentiate small metastases from intrahepatic vasculature[None]. These studies (Table 3) demonstrated that DW-MRI has a high sensitivity and specificity for the detection of liver metastases[None,None]. Of the benign solid lesions, hepatic haemangiomas have the highest ADC value, typically higher than the adjacent liver parenchyma, which can be ascribed to the T2 shine-through effect (Fig. Quantitative ADC measurements can be used to aid focal liver lesion characterization, but it may be difficult to confidently describe a lesion as benign or malignant based on ADC values alone, due to the considerable overlap between groups of hepatic pathologies. In patients with colorectal hepatic metastases, mean lesional ADC values have been shown to increase in response to chemotherapy in those patients showing at least a partial response[None,None], reflecting a reduction in tissue cellular density and barriers to water movement. For example, studies have shown that using IVIM analysis, cirrhotic liver shows a lower perfusion fraction and pseudodiffusion coefficient. 