In general, the quality of liver DW-MRI seems to be more consistent at 1.5 T compared with 3.0 T, although many institutions are now adopting the 3.0 T imaging platform for liver imaging because of the high-quality T1-weighted dynamic contrast-enhanced imaging that can be achieved at the higher field strength. Quantification of tissue diffusivity is performed using ADC maps, which can be evaluated visually or by drawing regions of interest on the ADC map to generate mean ADC values for the tissue/region of interest. However, to enable meaningful interpretation and for confidence in ascribing an observed ADC change to real treatment effects rather than to biological, instrumental or observer variations, it is important to establish the ADC measurement reproducibility of the scanner system[None]. In 2 studies, decrease in hepatic perfusion was cited as a reason because decreased liver perfusion fraction was observed in the cirrhotic liver, measured using multiplebvalue DW-MRI and analysed using the principles of intravoxel incoherent motion (IVIM)[None,None]. Improvement in lesion detection with DW-MRI can be explained by improved lesion to background image contrast using lowbvalue (or black-blood) images, which helps to differentiate small metastases from intrahepatic vasculature[None]. Even with the use of the liver-specific contrast medium (Gd-EOB-DTPA), it was the combination of hepatocellular phase T1-weighted imaging and DW-MR images that resulted in the highest diagnostic accuracy, increasing sensitivity without sacrificing specificity[None,None]. When DW-MRI was performed after the administration of superparamagnetic iron oxide contrast medium, lesion detection was also improved by suppression of background liver signal[None]. In patients with colorectal hepatic metastases, mean lesional ADC values have been shown to increase in response to chemotherapy in those patients showing at least a partial response[None,None], reflecting a reduction in tissue cellular density and barriers to water movement. As more studies are being conducted to assess the measurement reproducibility within and between MR imaging systems, it is clear that in a well-conducted study in which there is sufficient image SNR and minimal image artefact, mean ADC measurements have good reproducibility using the free-breathing fat-suppressed echo-planar spin-echo DW-MRI technique. Reports in the literature suggest that it is possible to measure perfusion-sensitive parameters such as the perfusion fraction (f) and flow-sensitive pseudodiffusion coefficient (D*); indeed these parameters have been found to differ between normal and diseased states. 