Asian populations account for greater than 60% of the world's diabetes patients (3,4), but data used for most of the engines specific to diabetes include only a limited number of Asians (5-9). Asian patients with diabetes have several important features. However, just combining the results of risk engines specific to each vascular complication may yield biased estimates of absolute risks since it is likely that each engine was developed independently, and a correlation between incidences of vascular complications is not accounted for in the development process. This was done by fitting a multistate Cox regression model (28), an extension of the Cox model to multiple time-to-event end points, to the pooled data from these trials. By the UKPDS risk engine, more than half of patients had a macrovascular risk of 10% or more (249 of the 376 cases and 697 of the 1,372 noncases), as expected by the tendency of overestimation The sensitivity and specificity of the UKPDS risk engine with a cutoff value of 10% risk were 66.2 and 49.2%, respectively. Risk classification of the 1,748 patients according to 5-year risks of macrovascular disease based on the JJ risk engine and the UKPDS risk engineTable 4shows how the combination of 5-year risks of macro- and microvascular complications based on the JJ risk engine classified low-risk and high-risk patients. Risk classification of the 1,748 patients according to 5-year risks of macro- and microvascular diseases based on the JJ risk engineTo illustrate the use of the JJ risk engine, consider two Japanese men 60 years of age with simple diabetic retinopathy and without atrial fibrillation who do not have smoking and exercise habits. In contrast, the UKPDS risk engine overestimated CHD risk, and this tendency is consistent with a previous report in Asian patients (18). Although the prevalence of micro- or macroalbuminuria in Asian hypertensive diabetes is alarmingly high (36), most of the progression to overt nephropathy occurs in a small fraction of patients with elevated HbA1cand SBP values and a smoking habit (12). We also found that the UKPDS risk engine overestimated CHD risk (Table 2) and the C statistic of the JJ risk engine (0.725) was slightly higher than that of the risk equation of the HKDR (0.704) (18), indicating that the JJ risk engine may outperform the previously developed risk engines for the prediction of CHD. With regard to lifestyle factors, we identified LTPA as a risk factor for stroke and noncardiovascular mortality, although the statistical significance was borderline. 