Thus, treatment that specifically interrupts tumour vasculature through inhibition of various important receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) signalling pathways, combined with a chemotherapy, may be of interest. Gemcitabine is used (alone or in combination with other chemotherapies, such as cisplatin or carboplatin) across a broad spectrum of solid tumours, including locally advanced or metastatic adenocarcinoma of the pancreas, metastatic BC, advanced NSCLC, ovarian cancer, bladder cancer, and others (Gemzar (gemcitabine HCl) prescribing information (2010);Gemzar (gemcitabine HCI) product monograph (2006)). Extensive preclinical evidence suggests additive and/or synergistic effects in solid tumour models when a variety of chemotherapies, including gemcitabine, are combined with targeted agents, including sunitinib (YeeNone, 2004;CarterNone, 2007;ChristensenNone, 2008), as demonstrated in a recently reported phase I trial of sunitinib on a continuous daily dosing schedule plus gemcitabine in patients with advanced solid tumours (BrellNone, 2012). The phase I dose-finding study reported here was also conducted to investigate the safety, pharmacokinetics (PK) and antitumor activity of sunitinib (on an intermittent dosing schedule) in combination with gemcitabine in patients with advanced solid tumours for whom curative therapy was not available. Schedule 4/2 was not evaluated past the initial combination dose level (sunitinib 37.5 mg and gemcitabine 750 mg m-2) as it proved to be an awkward scheduling regimen in practice because of missed or delayed doses of gemcitabine (see Determination of MTD). The most common grade 3 or 4 haematological toxicities related to sunitinib plus gemcitabine treatment in patients on Schedule 2/1, post-amendment, were neutropenia (n=13), leucopenia (n=8), and lymphopenia and thrombocytopenia (bothn=7). Non-haematological treatment-related AEs included: grade 4 uric acid elevation (n=2), hypertension, pulmonary embolism, and cerebrovascular accident (n=1 each), grade 3 elevation of amylase (n=2) or lipase (n=1), hypertension, pericardial effusion, leukoencephalopathy, nausea, mucosal inflammation, hypophosphatemia, and hypomagnesemia (eachn=1). Schedule 4/2 was not pursued beyond the initial dose level of sunitinib 37.5 mg plus gemcitabine 750 mg m-2for practical reasons (i.e., because of missed or delayed doses of gemcitabine because of slow recovery from neutropenia). In the earlier phase I trial with gemcitabine, growth factor support was excluded and the recommended phase II dose was gemcitabine 675 mg m-2on days 1 and 8 and sunitinib 25 mg on continuous daily dosing (BrellNone, 2012). Although targeted therapies have yet to deliver significant advances in pancreatic cancer treatment (O'Reilly 2009), there are indications that combining EGFR-directed and/or antiangiogenic agents with gemcitabine may be beneficial (MooreNone, 2007;Van CutsemNone, 2009). 