The clinical uses of liver DW-MRI include improved detection of focal liver lesions, contribution to tissue characterization for both diffuse disease and focal lesions, monitoring of tumour response after chemotherapy or radiotherapy, detection of recurrent disease, differentiating recurrence from post-therapeutic change, and potentially predicting treatment outcome. In general, the quality of liver DW-MRI seems to be more consistent at 1.5 T compared with 3.0 T, although many institutions are now adopting the 3.0 T imaging platform for liver imaging because of the high-quality T1-weighted dynamic contrast-enhanced imaging that can be achieved at the higher field strength. In 2 studies, decrease in hepatic perfusion was cited as a reason because decreased liver perfusion fraction was observed in the cirrhotic liver, measured using multiplebvalue DW-MRI and analysed using the principles of intravoxel incoherent motion (IVIM)[None,None]. Compared with T2-weighted MRI, the use of lowbvalues to generate black-blood images has been shown to result in comparable image quality but improved lesion detection[None,None,None], particularly for lesions less than or equal to 1 cm in diameter[None], for lesions lying adjacent to blood vessels and for those located in the right hepatic lobe[None]. In their study, qualitative visual assessment performed better than quantitative ADC measurement with sensitivities of 100% and 100%, and specificities of 92.2% and 89.3%, respectively. [None]suggests that minimum ADC could be useful in detecting poorly differentiated components of the tumour and that application of an ADC cut-off at 0.972 * 10-3 mm2 s-1distinguished moderately to poorly and poorly differentiated HCCs with a sensitivity of 73.1% and specificity of 72.9%. In cirrhotic liver, HCC (arrows) typically (a) demonstrates hyperenhancement in the arterial phase of low molecular weight Gd contrast-enhanced imaging; (b) appears relatively hypointense to liver in the portovenous or interstitial phase of contrast enhancement (washout) and (c) shows impeded diffusion on diffusion-weighted imaging (b = 500 s mm-2). However, there was a 37% increase in the mean ADC value (pre-treatment ADC = 1.49 * 10-3 mm2 s-1; post-treatment ADC = 2.05 * 10-3 mm2 s-1) within the tumour after treatment in keeping with treatment response. As more studies are being conducted to assess the measurement reproducibility within and between MR imaging systems, it is clear that in a well-conducted study in which there is sufficient image SNR and minimal image artefact, mean ADC measurements have good reproducibility using the free-breathing fat-suppressed echo-planar spin-echo DW-MRI technique. Although DW-MRI has been used for the evaluation of liver fibrosis, the sensitivity of the technique to early fibrosis appears limited, and more research is needed to optimize the measurement reproducibility of quantitative parameters derived by IVIM analysis before they can be robustly and meaningfully deployed in the clinical arena. 