For a comprehensive investigation of oxidative stress, we measured byproducts of ROS by serum thiobarbituric acid reactive substances (TBARS) as well as serum total thiols, superoxide dismutase (SOD) activity, and glutathione peroxidase (GPx) activity as an antioxidant defense capacity. Among 14 patients with MetS, 7 patients were treated with antihypertensive drugs, including calcium antagonists in 5 patients, beta-blockers in 3 patients, angiotensin II receptor blockers in 3 patients, and/or diuretics in 1 patient. To monitor the level of physical activity during daily life, daily steps and movement-related calorie consumption were measured for at least 1 week by using a pedometer with an accelerometry sensor (Lifecorder Plus; Suzuken, Nagoya, Japan), as previously described (10). After at least 30 min rest, high-energy phosphate metabolism in the calf muscle was measured during plantar flexion exercise in supine position on the original apparatus equipped with a 1.5-Tesla whole-body scanner system (Magnetom Vision VB33G; Siemens, Erlangen, Germany) using31P-MRS, as previously described (10). Phosphocreatine (PCr) was standardized as [PCr]/([PCr] + [Pi]) on the basis of the notion that [PCr] + [Pi] is constant at rest and during exercise, in which [PCr] indicates concentration of PCr, and [Pi] indicates concentration of inorganic phosphate (Pi). Moreover, the degree of PCr change (i.e., PCr loss) during exercise was calculated as PCr loss = standardized PCrrest- standardized PCrpeak, in which PCrrestindicates the PCr level at rest, and PCrpeakindicates the lowest PCr level during exercise. Based on the previous report that compared the marker of oxidative stress between control subjects and patients with MetS (22), a sample size of 13 subjects in each group was needed to detect the effect compared with the threshold change of 0 under the conditions of alpha = 0.05 and beta = 0.2. There was no significant difference in daily physical activity between patients with MetS and control subjects (steps: 8,367 +/- 3,670 vs. 7,172 +/- 1,717 steps/day; movement-related calorie consumption: 265 +/- 209 vs. 214 +/- 62 kcal/day). As a result, muscle PCr loss during exercise was greater in patients with MetS (Table 2). In addition, there was an inverse correlation between muscle PCr loss and peakVO2(r= -0.49;P less than 0.01) or AT (r= -0.51;P less than 0.01) normalized to body weight in all subjects by linear regression analysis, indicating that impairment in intramuscular high-energy phosphate metabolism was associated with the lower aerobic capacity in MetS. Skeletal muscle energy metabolismIMCL content was higher in patients with MetS than control subjects (Table 2). IMCL content also inversely correlated with peakVO2(r= -0.64;P less than 0.001) or AT (r= -0.61;P less than 0.001) normalized to body weight. Moreover, serum total thiols and SOD activity were significantly lower in patients with MetS than control subjects (Fig. There were also relationships between skeletal muscle energy metabolism and some indices of systemic oxidative stress (Fig. Therefore, we established a new association between systemic oxidative stress and aerobic capacity in patients with MetS. Moreover, thiol compounds, such as glutathione, cysteine, and cysteinyl-glycine, are natural reservoirs of reductive power and act as intracellular and extracellular redox buffers (24). We previously demonstrated that NAD(P)H oxidase-derived O2-production was significantly increased in the skeletal muscle from high-fat diet-induced diabetic mice in association with lower aerobic capacity and mitochondrial dysfunction in the skeletal muscle, and inhibition of NAD(P)H oxidase ameliorated these impairments (27). Because fatty acids are particularly prone to oxidative damage, lipid peroxidation products are easily formed in the skeletal muscle under the condition of increased ROS production, which can cause mitochondrial damage and subsequently decrease capacity for fatty acid oxidation (29). The relationship between systemic oxidative stress and lower aerobic capacity may indicate that systemic oxidative stress, at least in part, contributes to a poor prognosis in patients with MetS with low aerobic capacity, as oxidative stress can increase the risk of developing type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular diseases (34). In summary, we demonstrated for the first time that systemic oxidative stress including higher levels of lipid peroxidation and lower antioxidant defense capacity was related to lower aerobic capacity and impaired skeletal muscle energy metabolism in patients with MetS. 