Human studies have demonstrated a deleterious impact of diabetes mellitus (DM) on endothelial function in women compared with men (1). It is not known, however, if this represents a failure to augment maximally stimulated nitric oxide (NO) bioactivity or an absolute reduction in NO generation by the DM metabolic milieu in women compared with men. An exaggerated effect of DM on endothelial dysfunction in women may, in part, be responsible for the "sex-equalizing" effect that DM has on cardiovascular mortality and renal disease progression (3,4). Accordingly, our aim was to determine ifl-arginine, which is the substrate for NO synthase, would reverse sex-dependent renal hemodynamic and blood pressure differences in the response to clamped hyperglycemia in patients with uncomplicated type 1 DM. On the hyperglycemic day, after baseline blood pressure, renal and plasma cGMP measurements were obtained,l-arginine (Clinalpha, Laufelfingen, Switzerland) was administered at incremental low and moderate doses (100 mg/kg over 30 min and then 250 mg/kg over 30 min) to probe renal hemodynamic effects without confounding systemic hypotensive effects associated with higher doses (6-12). Renal function and circulating cGMP measurements were assessed at the end of eachl-arginine infusion period, as described in previous experiments (6). To further assess the interaction between ambient glycemia and NO synthase inhibition, participants subsequently underwent a graded intravenous infusion ofl-NMMA at 1 and 3 mg/kg during clamped hyperglycemia, as previously described (13). For renal hemodynamic parameters, in response tol-arginine during clamped hyperglycemia, GFR and FF decreased in women only, back toward baseline values observed during clamped euglycemia, although GFR remained numerically higher at the end of the hyperglycemicl-arginine infusion compared with the euglycemic baseline (P= not significant). Furthermore, consistent with our previous work performed during clamped euglycemia (13), predominant declines in ERPF and RBF compared with effects on GFR suggest thatl-NMMA infusion during clamped hyperglycemia also exerts a dominant preglomerular effect. Our data therefore suggest that women exhibit enhanced NO bioactivity in the postglomerular circulation at baseline during clamped euglycemia; clamped hyperglycemia alone quenches postglomerular NO, leading to an increase in GFR and FF with lesser effects on ERPF, and these effects are reversible with infusion ofl-arginine. In conclusion, our results suggest that NO bioactivity may contribute to the exaggerated renal effects of hyperglycemia in women with type 1 DM. 