Extensive preclinical evidence suggests additive and/or synergistic effects in solid tumour models when a variety of chemotherapies, including gemcitabine, are combined with targeted agents, including sunitinib (YeeNone, 2004;CarterNone, 2007;ChristensenNone, 2008), as demonstrated in a recently reported phase I trial of sunitinib on a continuous daily dosing schedule plus gemcitabine in patients with advanced solid tumours (BrellNone, 2012). The most common treatment-emergent (all causality) non-haematological AEs (all schedules, all doses) were fatigue (75.0%), gastrointestinal disorders (nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, constipation (each 45.5%)), and pyrexia (45.5%), the majority grade 1 or 2 in severity. The sunitinib dose was interrupted in 25 patients and reduced in 12 patients across all cohorts. Non-haematological treatment-related AEs included: grade 4 uric acid elevation (n=2), hypertension, pulmonary embolism, and cerebrovascular accident (n=1 each), grade 3 elevation of amylase (n=2) or lipase (n=1), hypertension, pericardial effusion, leukoencephalopathy, nausea, mucosal inflammation, hypophosphatemia, and hypomagnesemia (eachn=1). Plasma PK parameters and geometric mean ratios for subjects with paired observations for sunitinib, SU12662, total drug, gemcitabine and dFdU, as a single agent or in combination, are summarised for all dose levels combined inTable 4(plasma concentration time curves for patients on Schedule 2/1 are shown inSupplementary Figure 1). Our results indicate that oral sunitinib given on Schedule 2/1 combined with IV gemcitabine given on days 1 and 8, with each agent at the maximum individual approved dose, has a favourable safety profile. The study design was modified on Schedule 2/1 to allow growth factor support during cycle 1. This treatment regimen has promising antitumor activity, surpassing that shown in the earlier gemcitabine phase I combination trial, in which 4 of 33 patients had a PR (BrellNone, 2012). In conclusion, patients with advanced solid malignancies for whom curative therapy was not available tolerated sunitinib and gemcitabine at the maximum approved doses of each agent on Schedule 2/1 with growth factor support. Phase II studies of this combination in patients with RCC or pancreatic cancer are underway. 