normal physiological responsesto sustained hypoxia involve both an increase in pulmonary ventilation and an increase in pulmonary artery pressure, the latter arising from hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction. The first of these responses may be observed as an advantageous acclimatization that limits the degree of oxyhemoglobin desaturation of systemic arterial blood; the second of these responses appears to have no benefit, while predisposing to pulmonary edema and right-sided heart failure. Abnormal responses to sustained hypoxia include both the relatively common acute mountain sickness (AMS) together with the rarer diseases of high-altitude pulmonary edema and high-altitude cerebral edema. Dexamethasone, a potent synthetic glucocorticoid, has been used extensively to treat high-altitude illness. In AMS, dexamethasone noticeably reduces the symptoms and signs of the illness, and it has been used both prophylactically and therapeutically in this condition (11,12,18,38). In treating AMS, dexamethasone has been noted to increase oxyhemoglobin saturation when compared with control (12). In patients who have previously been shown to be susceptible to high-altitude pulmonary edema and who develop very high pulmonary arterial pressures on exposure to hypoxia, dexamethasone has been shown to reduce the rise in pulmonary arterial pressure when such patients are reexposed to the hypoxia of high altitude (13,30). Given the use of dexamethasone to prevent or treat high-altitude disease, the purpose of this study was to define the actions of dexamethasone on the early stages of ventilatory acclimatization to hypoxia in normal individuals. We hypothesized that dexamethasone might enhance the beneficial ventilatory acclimatization to hypoxia while obtunding the disadvantageous pulmonary vascular response to hypoxia. We examined this hypothesis by measuring the effects of dexamethasone on respiratory and cardiovascular responses to brief episodes (20 min) of hypoxia with and without an immediately preceding period of 8 h of hypoxia that previously has been shown to generate a marked degree of acclimatization to hypoxia; we designed the study to avoid any confounding effects of hypocapnia. We further examined the effect of dexamethasone on the response to 8 h of hypoxia of the hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-regulated product erythropoietin (EPO). Eight healthy volunteers (5 men, 3 women) participated in the study with an average age of 24 +/- 3 yr, height 172 +/- 8 cm, and weight 63 +/- 14 kg (mean +/- SD). Each volunteer gave informed consent before participating. 