The Look AHEAD Trial is a multicenter clinical trial that was undertaken to examine the effect of weight loss and fitness on CVD end points in individuals with T2DM. Reasons for missing fitness data at year 4 are presented inFig. After 16 weeks, the meal replacements provided to participants were reduced to one shake and one snack bar per day. Unstructured dependence structure was specified. Because clinic site was the randomization stratification factor, it was adjusted in the mixed-effects model. For the model with change in weight from baseline to year 4 as the outcome, we adjusted for baseline weight and fitness along with prescribed diabetes medication use. For the model with year 4 change in HbA1cas the outcome, covariates included baseline HbA1cand fitness, weight change from baseline to year 4, and prescribed diabetes medication use. When compared with participants who did not provide fitness data at 4 years, at baseline, those who did provide fitness data were significantly younger, had a lower weight, BMI, and waist circumference, had lower HbA1c, reported a shorter duration of diabetes, and had a higher level of fitness. When data for only those subjects who completed the fitness test at year 4 were examined, there was a significant difference in weight change for ILI (-4.9% [95% CI -5.5 to -4.5%]) compared with DSE (-1.2% [-1.5 to -0.8%]). 3). When change in fitness was treated as a continuous variable and with adjustment for selected covariates, there was a significant inverse association between HbA1cand change in fitness at 4 years (beta = -0.00431, SE = 0.00048,P less than 0.0001), and this was consistent when analyzed separately for DSE (beta = -0.0286, SE = 0.00130,P= 0.03) and ILI (beta = -0.00295, SE = 0.00106,P less than 0.0001). For example, the results of our mediation analysis showed that both weight loss and fitness change mediated the effect on change in HbA1c. The contribution of fitness to improving glycemic control, and the finding that ILI resulted in greater improvements in fitness compared with DSE, may be of particular importance in the Look AHEAD Trial, where the primary research question is to compare CVD outcomes in response to ILI compared with DSE. Moreover, the number of participants in DSE missing fitness measures is significantly higher than in ILI (P= 0.002). These results demonstrated an association between change in fitness and improvements in glycemic control, expressed as HbA1c, even after controlling for weight loss in both ILI and DSE. 