The clinical uses of liver DW-MRI include improved detection of focal liver lesions, contribution to tissue characterization for both diffuse disease and focal lesions, monitoring of tumour response after chemotherapy or radiotherapy, detection of recurrent disease, differentiating recurrence from post-therapeutic change, and potentially predicting treatment outcome. Although conventional computed tomography (CT) and MRI can identify patients with advanced liver cirrhosis, the evaluation of early hepatic fibrosis and inflammation is impossible with conventional MRI, and newer sequences such as DW-MRI and MR elastography are currently under evaluation. The reduction in water diffusivity seen with hepatic fibrosis is likely to be multifactorial but has in part been attributed to the increase in collagen within the liver, which has a lower unbound water content than normal hepatic parenchyma[None,None]. Of the benign solid lesions, hepatic haemangiomas have the highest ADC value, typically higher than the adjacent liver parenchyma, which can be ascribed to the T2 shine-through effect (Fig. (a) T1-weighted arterial phase after Gd-DOTA contrast administration shows peripheral nodular enhancement of the lesion in the right lobe of the liver. In cirrhotic liver, HCC (arrows) typically (a) demonstrates hyperenhancement in the arterial phase of low molecular weight Gd contrast-enhanced imaging; (b) appears relatively hypointense to liver in the portovenous or interstitial phase of contrast enhancement (washout) and (c) shows impeded diffusion on diffusion-weighted imaging (b = 500 s mm-2). (a) Arterial phase Gd-DOTA-enhanced MRI shows a lesion in the right lobe with peripheral nodularity, which does not show significant enhancement. As more studies are being conducted to assess the measurement reproducibility within and between MR imaging systems, it is clear that in a well-conducted study in which there is sufficient image SNR and minimal image artefact, mean ADC measurements have good reproducibility using the free-breathing fat-suppressed echo-planar spin-echo DW-MRI technique. Measurement reproducibility obtained from normal tissues may not be applicable to diseased states because disease tissues are typically more heterogeneous, which results in poorer measurement reproducibility compared with normal tissues[None]. Although DW-MRI has been used for the evaluation of liver fibrosis, the sensitivity of the technique to early fibrosis appears limited, and more research is needed to optimize the measurement reproducibility of quantitative parameters derived by IVIM analysis before they can be robustly and meaningfully deployed in the clinical arena. 