Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) is an increasing health concern in the U.S., and it is projected that the prevalence of this disease could exceed 13% in adults greater than 20 years of age by the year 2021 (1). We previously reported that fitness was significantly increased in ILI compared with DSE after 1 year of intervention (4), and that fitness remained significantly higher in ILI compared with DSE after 4 years of participation in this study (3). Reasons for missing fitness data at year 4 are presented inFig. The protocol that was previously described for assessing change in fitness at year 1 was also implemented for the year 2 and 4 assessments of cardiorespiratory fitness (4). Reasons for missing fitness data at year 4 are presented inFig. Data were also analyzed with both weight and fitness change considered as continuous variables. Data were analyzed to examine if change in glycemic control, measured by HbA1c, was influenced by fitness improvement, with fitness change categorized as described above. Post hoc analysis showed that there was a significant difference for change in HbA1cbetween subjects grouped as having a greater than 10% increase in fitness and both subject groups as having a greater than 10% decline in fitness (P less than 0.0001) and a 0-10% decline in fitness (P less than 0.0001) at 4 years, with these comparisons remaining significant when data were analyzed separately for DSE and ILI. Additional data presented here show that ILI was more effective than DSE at increasing fitness even after adjustment for baseline fitness and change in weight. However, it is important to recognize that the effect of weight loss on change in HbA1cwas significantly greater than the effect of change in fitness, but this does not minimize the important contribution of fitness in improving glycemic control. Despite minimal change in body weight in response to the DSE intervention, improved fitness was significantly related to improved glycemic control. This finding supports the need for primary care interventions to promote PA that results in significant improvements in fitness in patients with T2DM. 