We have also determined the association between laboratory-derived measures of glycemic control (HbA1c) and presence of renal complications (proteinuria and reduced eGFR) with the 5-year costs of caring for people with diabetes. These data are linked to Alberta Health administrative data, which captures resource utilization for all provincial residents with public health insurance. Since public health insurance does not provide universal drug coverage for residents less than 65 years of age, drug costs are only available for patients greater than 65 years of age. Cases of diabetes were defined based on health care encounters incurred between 1 April 1995 and the date of cohort entry, 1 May 2004. Age, sex, Aboriginal status, and measures of socioeconomic status were determined from the registry file. Outpatient measures for HbA1c, eGFR, and proteinuria (urine microalbumin-to-creatinine ratio [ACR] and urine dipstick) were included from 2 years prior to 6 months past the index date. For those patients not on dialysis at baseline, the eGFR was estimated from serum creatinine using the validated CKD-EPI equation (26). The ACR was used as the primary measure of proteinuria, supplemented by urine dipstick measurement when ACR was not available. As a secondary outcome, we studied 5-year cumulative costs for the subset of patients greater than 65 years of age, including drug costs. To inform the generalizability of our results, we determined the incidence of clinical outcomes (myocardial infarction, stroke, congestive heart failure, coronary revascularization, ESRD, and death) over the 5-year follow-up period, enabling a qualitative comparison with rates observed in other diabetes cohorts. In patients greater than 65 years of age, two-thirds had filled a prescription for one or more oral antidiabetic medication at baseline (62.2%), and approximately one-fifth (17.4%) of patients were on insulin. Compared with patients less than 65 years of age, patients greater than 65 years of age were less likely to be Aboriginal (6.5 vs. 2.2%), less likely to be on income support (16.7 vs. 4.8%), had a longer average duration of diabetes (5.0 vs. 5.9 years), and had a higher burden of disease measured by a Charlson score of greater than 3 (6.6 vs. 21.1%) (Table 1). Among patients less than 65 years of age, those with unmeasured HbA1cwere less likely to have comorbid illness, possibly suggesting that some of the unmeasured patients were misclassified. 1). Patients with good glycemic control had an adjusted mean cost of $27,064 per patient compared with $32,629 for patients with inadequate control. The model estimates that patients with an eGFR of 15 mL/min have average 5-year costs $91,419 higher compared with a patient with no renal impairment (eGFR 90 mL/min), patients with heavy proteinuria have costs $22,305 higher per patient compared with those with no proteinuria, and patients with inadequate glycemic control had costs $5,565 higher per patient compared with those with good glycemic control. Ordinary least squares regression analysis examining the demographic, clinical, and laboratory factors associated with mean total 5-year costs per patient in people with diabetesThe mean 5-year cost of diabetes in Alberta was CDN $26,978 per patient, excluding drug costs, and CDN $44,511 per patient for patients 65 years of age, including drug costs. Our analysis demonstrates that after adjusting for sex, age, duration of diabetes, Aboriginal status, socioeconomic status, and comorbid illness, costs increased with worsening kidney function, higher levels of proteinuria, and worsening glycemic control. Costs were also positively associated with age, Aboriginal status, lower socioeconomic status, duration of diabetes, and Charlson comorbidity index. This represents ?12.5% of total health care spending in Canada, which was estimated at $200 billion annually in 2011 (29). Similarly, Gilmer et al. (14) found that in HMO patients, higher HbA1cwas predictive of costs in patients with HbA1c greater than 7.5% but not in patients with HbA1cof less than 7.5%. Although this study does not provide direct evidence that improvements in diabetes management would lead to cost reductions, our findings demonstrate a clear association between increased cost and suboptimal glycemic control and markers of kidney disease. We did not adjust for medication use since this information was not available for the entire cohort, nor were we able to adjust for unknown factors, such as mild diabetes, misclassification, and more specific socioeconomic characteristics. 