Therapeutic inhibition of tumour angiogenesis and multiple signalling pathways associated with tumour development (e.g., pathways controlled by vascular endothelial growth factor receptors (VEGFRs) and platelet-derived growth factor receptors (PDGFRs)) results in clinically meaningful antitumor activity, as demonstrated across multiple tumour types, including colon cancer, pancreatic carcinoma, renal cell carcinoma (RCC), breast cancer (BC) and non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) (HurwitzNone, 2005;SandlerNone, 2006;MillerNone, 2007;BursteinNone, 2008;ManegoldNone, 2008;EscudierNone, 2009). Patients were excluded if previously treated with gemcitabine or sunitinib; had severe/unstable angina, myocardial infarction, symptomatic congestive heart failure, cerebrovascular accident, or transient ischaemic attack within the previous 12 months; National Cancer Institute Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (NCI CTCAE, version 3.0) grade 3 haemorrhage within 4 weeks of study entry; uncontrolled hypertension; uncontrolled brain metastases; and a second malignancy diagnosis within the last 5 years. Non-haematological DLTs were any drug-related grade 3 or 4 toxicities lasting ?7 days (except for grade 3/4 hyperamylasemia or hyperlipasemia without signs of pancreatitis, grade 4 hyperuricemia or grade 3/4 hypophosphatemia without clinical symptoms, or grade 3 asymptomatic hypertension), and nausea, vomiting, or diarrhoea persisting at grade 3 or 4 despite treatment. The primary objective was to assess the MTD and overall safety and tolerability of sunitinib administered in combination with gemcitabine in patients with advanced solid tumours. However, several patients treated on this regimen either missed or had delayed doses of gemcitabine because of slow recovery from neutropenia, and it was decided not to pursue this regimen further. Non-haematological treatment-related AEs included: grade 4 uric acid elevation (n=2), hypertension, pulmonary embolism, and cerebrovascular accident (n=1 each), grade 3 elevation of amylase (n=2) or lipase (n=1), hypertension, pericardial effusion, leukoencephalopathy, nausea, mucosal inflammation, hypophosphatemia, and hypomagnesemia (eachn=1). Among 25 patients on Schedule 2/1, post amendment, PRs were observed in 7 patients across the full range of doses: two with pancreatic carcinoma and five with RCC. Our results indicate that oral sunitinib given on Schedule 2/1 combined with IV gemcitabine given on days 1 and 8, with each agent at the maximum individual approved dose, has a favourable safety profile. For example, the incidences of the most common grade 3 or 4 haematological toxicities associated with this combination (Schedule 2/1, post-amendment) were substantially higher than that with sunitinib monotherapy (in treatment-naive patients with metastatic RCC;SUTENT (sunitinib malate) prescribing information (2012)): neutropenia (52%vs17%, respectively), leucopenia (32%vs8%), lymphopenia (28%vs18%) and thrombocytopenia (28%vs9%). This treatment regimen has promising antitumor activity, surpassing that shown in the earlier gemcitabine phase I combination trial, in which 4 of 33 patients had a PR (BrellNone, 2012). In our study, all of the RCC patients who were poor risk and/or had high grade or sarcomatoid disease achieved a PR or SD with sunitinib plus gemcitabine. In conclusion, patients with advanced solid malignancies for whom curative therapy was not available tolerated sunitinib and gemcitabine at the maximum approved doses of each agent on Schedule 2/1 with growth factor support. 