At the renal microvascular level, we have demonstrated that clamped hyperglycemia is associated with renal hyperfiltration responses in women but not in men (2). Accordingly, our aim was to determine ifl-arginine, which is the substrate for NO synthase, would reverse sex-dependent renal hemodynamic and blood pressure differences in the response to clamped hyperglycemia in patients with uncomplicated type 1 DM. Finally, we hypothesized thatNG-monomethyl-l-arginine (l-NMMA) infusion during hyperglycemia would exaggerate the effects of clamped hyperglycemia in women because of further suppression of NO bioactivity. After the desired level of ambient glycemia was maintained for 6 h, a third intravenous line was inserted into the right arm and was connected to a syringe infusion pump for administration of inulin and PAH. Blood was further collected every 30 min for 60 min for inulin and PAH, and GFR and ERPF were estimated by steady-state infusion of inulin and PAH, respectively (5). On the hyperglycemic day, after baseline blood pressure, renal and plasma cGMP measurements were obtained,l-arginine (Clinalpha, Laufelfingen, Switzerland) was administered at incremental low and moderate doses (100 mg/kg over 30 min and then 250 mg/kg over 30 min) to probe renal hemodynamic effects without confounding systemic hypotensive effects associated with higher doses (6-12). Renal function and circulating cGMP measurements were assessed at the end of eachl-arginine infusion period, as described in previous experiments (6). The cGMP assay is based on the competition between cGMP in the standards or samples and a cGMP-acetylcholinesterase conjugate (cGMP tracer) for a limited number of cGMP-specific rabbit antibody binding sites. 1). For renal hemodynamic parameters, in response tol-arginine during clamped hyperglycemia, GFR and FF decreased in women only, back toward baseline values observed during clamped euglycemia, although GFR remained numerically higher at the end of the hyperglycemicl-arginine infusion compared with the euglycemic baseline (P= not significant). As expected, SBP did not change in either group in response tol-arginine during clamped hyperglycemia. The effect ofl-arginine on plasma cGMP during clamped hyperglycemia in men and women with uncomplicated type 1 DM (mean +/- SD). *P= 0.001 for the cGMP level during clamped hyperglycemia compared with clamped euglycemia in women. Our major observations included that expected increases in GFR and FF in response to clamped hyperglycemia were associated with exaggerated declines in cGMP in women. Also, in women, administration ofl-arginine reduced GFR and FF but not SBP, back toward values observed during clamped euglycemic conditions. This finding suggests that exaggerated hyperglycemia-induced renal effects observed in DM women are partly related to a decline in NO bioactivity (3). Our data therefore suggest that women exhibit enhanced NO bioactivity in the postglomerular circulation at baseline during clamped euglycemia; clamped hyperglycemia alone quenches postglomerular NO, leading to an increase in GFR and FF with lesser effects on ERPF, and these effects are reversible with infusion ofl-arginine. The resulting decline in NO bioactivity may, in part, explain the blunted systemic arterial response to NO synthase blockade with L-NAME in female rats with DM compared with male rats with DM (28). We attempted to minimize the effect of the small sample size in our study by using homogeneous study groups and by using a careful prestudy preparation phase with a focus on known factors that influence neurohormonal activation. 