Water protons in the body exist in the intra- and extracellular spaces; free diffusion is modified by bulk capillary flow and the interactions of the protons with cell membranes and macromolecules. In highly cellular tissues (e.g. tumour tissue), the tortuosity of the extracellular space and cell membrane density limit the apparent diffusion of water, which is said to be impeded[None,None]. In 2 studies, decrease in hepatic perfusion was cited as a reason because decreased liver perfusion fraction was observed in the cirrhotic liver, measured using multiplebvalue DW-MRI and analysed using the principles of intravoxel incoherent motion (IVIM)[None,None]. One probable explanation for this observation is that protons associated with intra- and extracellular fat have reduced diffusivity, thus resulting in a lower ADC compared with normal parenchyma[None]. Application of a small diffusion weighting (b less than 50-150 s mm-2) nulls the intrahepatic vascular signal resulting in black-blood images that improve the detection of focal liver lesions while maintaining a high SNR (Fig. Improvement in lesion detection with DW-MRI can be explained by improved lesion to background image contrast using lowbvalue (or black-blood) images, which helps to differentiate small metastases from intrahepatic vasculature[None]. Even with the use of the liver-specific contrast medium (Gd-EOB-DTPA), it was the combination of hepatocellular phase T1-weighted imaging and DW-MR images that resulted in the highest diagnostic accuracy, increasing sensitivity without sacrificing specificity[None,None]. When DW-MRI was performed after the administration of superparamagnetic iron oxide contrast medium, lesion detection was also improved by suppression of background liver signal[None]. In patients with colorectal hepatic metastases, mean lesional ADC values have been shown to increase in response to chemotherapy in those patients showing at least a partial response[None,None], reflecting a reduction in tissue cellular density and barriers to water movement. 