The (auto)antibodies were determined by technicians blinded to the participants' identification and treatment regimen. In the original anti-CD3 protocol, the predefined prognostic factors were age, sex, body weight, BMI, duration of insulin therapy at screening, status of ICA and GADA (positive vs. negative), and HLA-DQ (protective vs. nonprotective) at screening, as well as HbA1clevel and clamp-derived C-peptide release (above or below the median [P50] of all 80 included patients) at start of the treatment. We examined by multiple linear regression whether baseline IAA levels could serve as independent predictor(s) of the response to anti-CD3 therapy apart from residual beta-cell function or age at diagnosis (4,5). In addition, higher IAA levels at screening came out as the strongest independent predictor, whereas none of the tested variables appeared predictive in the ChAglyCD3-treated group (Table 2). When all participants were considered together in multivariate analysis, IAA levels at screening remained the only independent predictor of better outcome, apart from anti-CD3 administration (model 1,Table 2). A significant interaction between higher IAA levels and C-peptide release was observed (model 2,Table 2). Placebo-treated (0), ChAglyCD3-treated (1). Figure 1Noneshows the significantly less rapid decline in AUC C-peptide release, andFig. Likewise, anti-CD3 treatment preserved clamp-derived C-peptide release and the associated lower insulin needs, compared with the placebo group, in individuals with AUC C-peptide release at inclusion greater than =P50 of the entire group (Fig. 1NoneandNone) but not in those with initial values less than P50 (Fig. AUC C-peptide release during 18-month follow-up in placebo-treated (?) patients stratified according to clamp-derived C-peptide release and IAA levels at screening. In contrast, the rise in insulin-induced IA was less pronounced under otelixizumab treatment during the 18-month study period, but only in initially IAA+patients with relatively preserved functional beta-cell mass at diagnosis ( greater than =P50 AUC C-peptide release at baseline) (Supplementary Fig. This study identified elevated IAA levels at screening of type 1 diabetes as an independent predictor of the efficacy of anti-CD3 (otelixizumab) treatment to preserve residual beta-cell mass for 18 months. Anti-CD3 treatment did not influence the natural history of other autoantibodies after diagnosis but was associated with a lesser rise in I(A)A levels selectively in patients who responded well to anti-CD3 therapy and required less insulin. This observation warrants the measurement of IAA in future trials before intervention in recent-onset type 1 diabetes. 