(5) found a significantly higher risk for type 2 diabetes in Asians, Hispanics, and blacks, compared with whites, after accounting for BMI or overall adiposity and behavioral risk factors. We created a dietary diabetes risk reduction score that included components more recently found to be associated with risk of type 2 diabetes, including SSBs, coffee, nuts, and red and processed meats, in addition to the four components used in an earlier analysis, which included GI, cereal fiber, P:S, andtransfat (5). In general, black women were more likely to have higher mean BMI and be less physically active compared with NHW women. Compared with NHW women, the mean dietary diabetes risk reduction score was slightly lower among Asian and black women, but the quantitative differences were small. Sum of quartile values (1-4) for intakes of cereal fiber, P:S, coffee, and nuts (ascending order) and GI,transfat, SSBs, and red and processed meat (descending order); higher score indicates a healthier overall diet. All of these associations were similar in magnitude in overall minority women, but only GI (positively), intakes of cereal fiber (inversely), SSBs (positively), coffee (inversely), and red and processed meats (positively) were significantly associated with type 2 diabetes risk. SIncludes Asian, Hispanic, and black women. Although the relative risk estimates were similar across racial and ethnic groups, the absolute risk difference for the same contrast in dietary score was larger for the minority women compared with NHW women. They found that higher dietary quality predicted lower risk of diabetes in white and Hispanic women but not in black or Asian women. observed wide CIs that precluded them from finding significant associations in all minority groups. In our study, we observed that higher GI and lower cereal fiber intake were associated with greater risk of type 2 diabetes in minority women. We found a 25% higher risk of developing type 2 diabetes with an increase of one serving of SSB per day in NHW women and 16% higher risk in minority women. The association between SSB and type 2 diabetes risk may be mediated by weight gain because SSBs are energy-dense beverages that may induce weight gain (37). In our study, we found a 10% reduction in risk of diabetes per one cup increase of coffee per day in NHW women and 12% reduction in risk in overall minority women. (9), we found a significant positive association betweentransfat intake and risk of type 2 diabetes in NHW women; however, the association was not significant in minority women. P:S was not significantly associated with type 2 diabetes risk in NHW or minority women. 