5 * 106cells/mouse). About 150 islets were examined for every group. We have also examined the ability of zymosan-exposed or unexposed DCs from NOD mice to express Raldh1A2 in comparison with DCs that are treated with LPS. This experiment was repeated at least four times with similar results. Next, zymosan DCs were examined for their ability to modulate T-cell response using purified T cells from OT-II-TCR-Tg mice. However, the zymosan-exposed DCs induced significantly higher frequencies of Foxp3+cells in culture as compared with unexposed or LPS-exposed DCs. Importantly, T cells from only LPS-recipient, but not zymosan-recipient, mice could induce hyperglycemia in young NOD mice (Fig. Whether intravenous injection with zymosan can lead to a strong inflammatory response was also assessed by determining the serum levels of CRP in zymosan-treated mice. As observed inSupplementary Fig. Importantly, PnLN of all groups of mice that were treated with zymosan and/or beta-cell-Ag also showed a significant number of proliferating BDC2.5 T cells. PnLN from all BDC2.5 peptide-injected mice showed a more or less similar extent of BDC2.5 T-cell proliferation (Fig. In addition, upon peptide injection, spleen cells from zymosan-treated and untreated mice showed a similar extent of BDC2.5 T-cell proliferation. Representative graphs from two independent experiments are shown. However, these T cells failed to induce hyperglycemia in zymosan- and zymosan plus beta-cell-Ag-treated groups of mice. While spleen cells from zymosan- and zymosan plus beta-cell-Ag-recipient mice did not show a difference in cell death, PnLN of these treated mice had a higher number of Annexin V- and/or 7-AAD-positive cells compared with control mice (Supplementary Fig. As observed inSupplementary Fig. As observed inSupplementary Fig. As observed inSupplementary Fig. While this enhanced proliferative ability of T cells from zymosan-treated mice, compared with control T cells, could be an effect of the cytokines IL-2 and TNF-alpha produced by zymosan-exposed APCs, this result suggests that zymosan treatment does not produce general immune suppression. 5None, mice that were treated with zymosan and beta-cell-Ag remained diabetes free for a significantly longer duration than the mice that received zymosan alone. In addition, as observed in our previous study (13), mice that received zymosan also showed significant protection from T1D as compared with untreated mice. Treatment using zymosan and beta-cell-Ag resulted in better protection of NOD mice from hyperglycemia as compared with treatment with zymosan alone. The pancreatic islets of prediabetic mice that received zymosan and beta-cell-Ag showed significantly less severe immune cell infiltration and insulitis compared with peptide-treated and untreated control mice within 30 days posttreatment (Fig. Mice were bled every 3 days for glucose levels. Examination of the pancreatic tissue from one set of these mice, 30 days posttreatment, revealed that zymosan- and beta-cell-Ag-treated mice have a significantly higher number of infiltration-free islets or islets with less severe insulitis compared with other groups after 30 days posttreatment (Supplementary Fig. Spleen and PnLN cells obtained from mice that were killed 30 days posttreatment were examined for their ability to respond to an ex vivo challenge with beta-cell-Ag. Both CD4+and CD8+T cells from mice that received beta-cell-Ag or zymosan plus beta-cell-Ag showed a comparable extent of CFSE dilution upon ex vivo challenge, which was significantly higher than that of their counterparts from untreated control mice (Supplementary Fig. Further, as observed inFig. Moreover, zymosan beta-cell-Ag-recipient mice showed a higher number of IL-17-producing CD4+and CD8+T cells as compared with control groups. However, the splenic Foxp3+CD4+T-cell frequencies in zymosan- and beta-cell-Ag-treated mice were not different. These observations, in association withFig. Here, we show that coadministration of beta-cell-Ag and zymosan leads to prolonged protection of NOD mice from diabetes, and this effect appears to be dependent on a combination of zymosan-induced regulatory innate immune response involving IL-10, TGF-beta1, IL-2, and Raldh1A2 and modulation of T-cell response by zymosan-exposed APCs. Interestingly, we observed that the percentages of IL-10- and IL-4-positive T cells were higher in the spleen of both zymosan alone and zymosan plus beta-cell-Ag groups, indicating that these cells may be the result of zymosan-induced innate immune response. In addition to the difference in cytokine profiles of T cells from zymosan- and beta-cell-Ag-treated and control mice, these treated mice showed higher Foxp3+T-cell frequencies in the PnLN, but not spleen, compared with zymosan-treated mice. Our observations show that treatment withE. Increased cell death in the PnLN, but not spleen, of zymosan-treated mice suggests an additional mechanism to eliminate inflammatory immune cells and suppress autoimmunity. Although the role of zymosan-induced cell death at the site of inflammation in reduced insulitis and protection of NOD mice from T1D requires further investigation, our current study shows that the synergistic innate immune response mediated by TLR2 and Dectin 1 has the unique ability to not only produce regulatory innate immunity but also modulate T-cell response to beta-cell-Ag and protect NOD mice from T1D. 