Finally, Survivin antagonists impair growth of MB in vivo, highlighting the potential of Survivin as a therapeutic target in patients with MB. These data indicate that Survivin is highly expressed inPtchmutant tumors, raising the possibility that it might play an important role in tumor growth or maintenance. To investigate the importance of Survivin for growth of MB cells, we first utilized a genetic approach. We then looked at the effect ofsurvivinloss on proliferation. Together, these data demonstrate that Survivin is necessary for proliferation and cell cycle progression of MB cells. Given the importance of Survivin for MB proliferation, we hypothesized that pharmacological agents that inhibit Survivin expression or function might interfere with tumor growth. To test the ability of YM155 to inhibitsurvivinexpression inPtchmutant MB cells, we treated cells with the drug for 48hrs, isolated RNA and performed qRT-PCR forsurvivin. To test the effects of Survivin antagonists on MB growth, we treated tumor cells with these agents and analyzed the percentage of cells expressing the proliferation marker Ki67. Consistent with our genetic results, inhibition of Survivin using either YM155 or S12 caused a significant decrease in the number of Ki67+ cells compared to treatment with vehicle (DMSO) (Figure 3A-D). These data suggest that Survivin antagonists effectively inhibit MB growthin vitro. To determine whether Survivin antagonists also cause cell cycle arrest in MB cells, we performed cell cycle analysis. Notwithstanding these differences, our data demonstrate that both Survivin antagonists alter normal cell cycle progression of MB cells. As shown inFigure 4E-G, antagonists increased the percentage of apoptotic (AnnexinV+) tumor cells from 21% (after DMSO treatment) to 62% (S12) or 59% (YM155). Treatment of GNPs with YM155 or S12 caused a dose dependent increase in the percentage of dead cells (as measured by EthD1 staining). To test this, we performed thymidine incorporation assays on tumor cells treated with Survivin antagonists for 24hr followed by exposure to varying doses of radiation (Figure 5A). Consistent with our genetic studies, Survivin antagonists significantly decreased proliferation and altered cell cycle progression. Analysis of Annexin+ cells after treatment with Survivin antagonists showed that apoptosis is not detectable until 36hr, whereas cell cycle inhibition is observed by 12-24hr. In agreement with these data, we found that Survivin antagonists significantly enhanced the sensitivity of MB cells to radiation. Although in these studies we focused on co-treatment, it would be interesting to look at the ability of Survivin antagonists to overcome LDE225 resistance. We show that human PDX cells with such downstream mutations are still sensitive to inhibition by Survivin antagonists. YM155 inhibits survivin expression in MB cells. Ptchmutant tumor cells were treated with DMSO (D) or YM155 (Y) for 48 hours and analyzed for expression ofsurvivinby real time PCR (A) and by western blotting after 24 hr. LLP3 inhibits proliferation ofNonemutant tumor cells. Cells in differentiation media were cultured for 5 days, followed by treatment with DMSO, YM155, or S12 for 48 hr and incubation with EthD1 to mark dead/dying cells (B). Survivin is highly expressed in PDX tumors. 