These results validate our hypothesis and show for the first time that histone methylation influences macrophages toward a proinflammatory response in diabetic wounds and plays an essential role in the initiation and maintenance of chronic wound inflammation. Body weights and insulin levels were determined prior to experimentation. Two wounds per mouse were made in such a manner. One million viable cells were analyzed. Gapdh was used as the internal control. IL-12 production was examined using Bioplex. There were no statistical differences between the groups. Immune cell isolations were performed immediately after surgery. Leukocytes were harvested from the buffy coat. Macrophages isolated from T2D human wounds showed a significant decrease in M2 scavenger receptors compared with wound macrophages in nondiabetic individuals (Fig. 4None, both LSK cells and macrophages from DIO mice have significantly decreased levels of H3K27me3, a methylation mark causing transcriptional repression. DIO BM stem/progenitor cells and peripheral macrophages display decreased trimethylation of H3K27me3 on theIL-12promoter. B-D: BM stem/progenitor cells (lin-/c-Kit+), wound, and EWAT macrophages (CD11b+) were isolated in vivo using MACS and analyzed by ChIP for H3K27me3 levels on the promoter ofIL-12(n= 3/group, plated in triplicate). E: H3K27me3 methylation was measured along theIL-12promoter in BMDMs (n= 3, replicated twice). Using ChIP assays, we found H3K27me3 was significantly decreased on theIL-12gene promoter in DIO BM stem/progenitor cells (LK), peripheral wound macrophages (CD11b+), and EWAT macrophages (CD11b+) compared with controls (Fig. ChIP analysis of the promoter of two M2-associated genes demonstrated no differences in H3K27 methylation in DIO BMDMs compared with controls (Supplementary Fig. These data suggest that histone methylation changes may affect gene expression in multiple T2D models and that IL-12 gene expression may be altered by H3K27me3 methylation. The amount of Jmjd3 transcript present in vivo in BM LK cells and BMDMs is significantly increased in the DIO cells compared with controls (Fig. Further, Jmjd3 levels are significantly increased in BM isolates from human T2D patients compared with nondiabetic controls (Fig. Importantly, when BMDMs were treated with LPS/IFN-gamma, GSK-J4 decreasedIL-12production in a dose-dependent fashion (Fig. Thus, both the chemical inhibitor and specific Jmjd3-targeted siRNA were able to effectively reverse IL-12 expression in DIO macrophages. A: Gene expression of chromatin-modifying enzymes was analyzed using PCR array plates in CD11b+MACS-isolated cells from DIO and control wounds at day 3. Enzymes that were upregulated are shown. The threshold was set to a fourfold difference. E: ChIP analysis for Jmjd3 on theIL-12promoter in DIO BMDMs compared with controls (n= 3/group, replicated once). Expression ofJmjd3andIL-12in CD11b+wound macrophages was also increased in the chimeric mice receiving DIO BM, suggesting that H3K27 trimethylation in BM cells may play a key role in promoting the exaggerated proinflammatory response seen in diabetic macrophages (Fig. The role of macrophages in chronic inflammation development associated with obesity and T2D has been well studied; however, how macrophages maintain a proinflammatory environment and promote chronic inflammation in T2D wounds has not been defined (32). Our findings represent the first report on the role of epigenetics in BM cells and macrophages in obese, insulin-resistant T2D conditions and the resultant effects on modulating peripheral macrophage function/phenotype in wound healing. These studies have failed to address the excessive number of inflammatory monocyte macrophages that perpetuate chronic inflammation in T2D wounds, and hence, T2D patients have not seen significant benefits from stem cell therapies directed at wound healing (36,37). 