Higher DMA% and lower MMA% have also been related to obesity in studies from Mexico and the U.S. (21,22), although the temporality of these associations is unclear. In the SHS, we found that higher iAs exposure was associated with higher diabetes prevalence (6), supporting the need to further investigate the prospective associations between arsenic exposure and metabolism with diabetes incidence. Fasting plasma glucose level was determined by hexokinase method. Arsenic speciation can discriminate species directly related to iAs exposure (arsenite, arsenate, MMA, and DMA) from those related to organic arsenicals (arsenobetaine) in seafood, which are generally considered nontoxic (36). From the risk assessment perspective, the sum of inorganic (iAs) and methylated (MMA, DMA) arsenic species in the urine was used to estimate arsenic exposure levels from multiple sources and exposure routes and can help to evaluate dose-response relationships related to exposure levels to inform risk assessment. The relative proportions of arsenic metabolites (iAs%, MMA%, and DMA%) were used to estimate the extent to which iAs is metabolized in the human body and inform on various arsenic metabolic profiles across individuals. Entering each biomarker alone is difficult to interpret because the increase in iAs, for instance, could be related to a decrease in either MMA or DMA. Model 3: further adjusted for smoking and alcohol drinking. The same interpretation applied when DMA% and iAs% and when MMA% and DMA% were in the model simultaneously. In the conventional approach, each arsenic metabolism biomarker (iAs%, MMA%, and DMA%) is entered alone in the model. In that model, an increase in each arsenic metabolism biomarker corresponds to a decrease in the biomarker that is left out of the model. Model 3: further adjusted for smoking and alcohol drinking. Hazard ratios for incident diabetes by arsenic metabolism biomarkers. The histogram represents the distributions of arsenic metabolism biomarkers (iAs%, MMA%, and DMA%) among the study participants. Consistently, higher MMA% was associated with lower risk of diabetes. Arsenic exposure, measured by the concentration of inorganic plus methylated arsenic species in urine, however, was not associated with diabetes incidence in this study population. Experimental studies in general have not focused on differences by arsenic metabolism. In any case, the findings indicate that more research is needed to understand the impact of arsenic methylation and other methylation processes related to one-carbon metabolism on the development of diabetes. BMI, however, remained a strong risk factor. Studies in younger populations with a lower prevalence of diabetes at baseline are needed. In conclusion, arsenic metabolism, in particular low MMA%, is associated with increased incidence of diabetes and could reflect individual susceptibility for diabetes development. 