*Genes involved in pathways targeted by antidiabetes medications were compiled from the literature. We attempted to leverage existing GWAS data sets to comprehensively test whether these pathways contain multiple genes, in addition to those already known, that harbor natural genetic perturbations that may influence risk of T2D. Drug class targets and their downstream effectors were considered broadly for each drug class. A significant skewness below a givenPvalue cutoff (enrichment cutoff) would suggest that the gene set is enriched for multiple genes associated with the tested complex disease or trait. One of the antidiabetes drug target genes, TNF lies in this region. To test if the gene set enrichment results obtained by MAGENTA replicated in an independent study, we applied a modified GSEA method for genetic association data that we developed in Morris et al. The Metabochip is a custom array designed to follow-up nominal associations for T2D and 22 other metabolic and cardiovascular traits in a more cost-effective manner than genome-wide SNP arrays and contains 5,057 T2D replication SNPs chosen based on the top independent association signals in DIAGRAMv3 (12). Specifically, the modified GSEA method tests for enrichment of antidiabetes drug target genes among all genes near a set of top T2D-associated SNPs based on the Metabochip meta-analysis. To account for differences in coverage of the Metabochip replication SNPs across all genes in the genome, we generated an empirical null distribution ofNoneforNonerandomly sampled sets of SNPs, matched for SNP number and local gene density with the T2D SNPs/loci setl. 1) than that of the actual T2D SNP set (Eqs. MAGENTA suggests that 18 of the 41 loci (44 genes) above the 75th percentile enrichment cutoff (expected number of genes above cutoff, 23) (see columns 3-5 inTable 2) are true associations with T2D risk, 4 of which map onto known T2D loci (see column 8 ofTable 2) and 14 of which may contain new SNP associations with T2D. GIPRwas added to our drug target gene list before its association with T2D reached genome-wide significance in a joint meta-analysis of DIAGRAMv3 and Metabochip (3). Distribution of T2D gene associationPvalues of antidiabetes drug targets. Because 6 of the 102 drug target genes lie in five validated loci associated with T2D (Table 1andSupplementary Table 1), we asked whether the T2D enrichment signal observed in the antidiabetes drug target set was mainly due to genes in known association regions or whether it was also driven by additional new associations of modest effect sizes that have not yet reached genome-wide significance (due to insufficient GWAS sample size). For this, we used the large-scale T2D association meta-analysis of ?24,000 T2D cases and ?58,000 controls genotyped on Metabochip and applied a modified GSEA method that accounts for the SNP bias of this custom array (seeNonefor details). 2Gene near T2D SNP found in the joint T2D meta-analysis of DIAGRAMv3 and Metabochip, which did not reach genome-wide significance in DIAGRAMv3 alone. 3Genes near T2D SNPs that have not yet reached genome-wide significance but have a high posterior probability of being associated with T2D based on Metabochip analysis (3). Based on 95 loci associated with global lipid traits in (33). These findings highlight insulin sensitivity networks as a common nidus of potential T2D associations. Genes such asACSL1,NFKB1, andGIPRthat replicated in two independent genetic studies (DIAGRAMv3 and Metabochip) are top candidates for follow-up. 