Even though a large part of adolescent smokers is motivated to quit and cessation attempts are frequent, only few of these cessation attempts are successful (Bancej, O'Loughlin, Platt, Paradis, Gervais, 2007). An additional factor hindering successful smoking cessation in adolescence is the fact that young smokers may want to become smoke free, but professional cessation support is neither well known nor well liked among this population (Leatherdale McDonald, 2007). Additional potential predictors of adolescent smoking cessation can be identified from a prospective observational study of adolescent smokers with no professional treatment contact (Kleinjan et al., 2009). Results from a study with young adult smokers suggest that living in a household with another smoker may present a barrier to participation (Audrain-McGovern et al., 2009). Intervention participation was coded dichotomously (no participation - participation). Predictors of participation in the intervention were first analyzed using simple logistic regression analyses. Regarding hypothesis 3, the odds of participating increased with reports of more friends smoking. Also, the odds of participation were increased for students who reported smoking siblings. Significant predictors of the simple logistic regression analyses were then tested in a multivariate path analysis. The present study provides information on predictors of voluntary participation in behavioral smoking cessation interventions for adolescents. and smoking could be highlighted, to enhance young smokers' motivation to participate. Furthermore, the anti-tobacco industry content of the information session could be increased in order to improve quit intentions among attending smokers (Malone, Grundy, Bero, 2012). This finding speaks to the relevance of individual-based recruitment strategies (e.g., direct referral by teachers or school social workers) and is consistent with previous reports on the importance of peer referral for recruitment of adolescent smokers (Breland, Colby, Dino, Smith, Taylor, 2009;Thrul et al., 2014). Overall, in line with recommendations from other researchers (Sussman Sun, 2009), we argue that the school is a setting well suited to recruit young smokers into professional cessation interventions. 