Acipimox is a nicotinic acid analog used to treat hyperlipidemia (1,2). Indeed, some studies showed sustained beneficial effects of acipimox treatment on plasma NEFA and insulin sensitivity (3,10). We found that despite an anticipated rebound effect on plasma NEFA levels, acipimox has pronounced effects in vivo, ex vivo, and in cell culture experiments on mitochondrial function comparable to the effects of other NAD+precursors, such as NR and NMM, as found in animals. In Dusseldorf, body composition was measured with DEXA scan. Any visible nonmuscle material was dissected from muscle tissue. The remaining muscle tissue was used for mitochondrial respiration analysis. To evaluate mitochondrial oxidative capacity, different substrate protocols were applied. (State 3 respiration reflects substrate oxidation coupled to energy production.) Therefore, we examined whether sustained acipimox treatment influenced insulin sensitivity when the acute effect of acipimox was omitted. The effect of high NEFA levels on insulin sensitivity has been previously ascribed to fat accumulation in skeletal muscle (34). Although acipimox induced a rebound increase of plasma NEFA levels, which was associated with the development of insulin resistance, we hypothesized that acipimox may have a direct effect on mitochondrial oxidative capacity independent of its confounding effects on NEFA levels. Data are uncorrected for mtDNA. To find further evidence for a direct effect of acipimox on mitochondrial metabolism, we performed microarray analysis on vastus lateralis muscle biopsy specimens of a small and randomly chosen subset of patients (n= 3). A: GSEA of muscle biopsy specimens from humans before and after 2 weeks of acipimox treatment. To further investigate whether acipimox has a direct effect on muscle mitonuclear protein imbalance, we used differentiated C2C12 cells incubated with acipimox or an empty vehicle. First, we confirmed that acipimox is able to increase NAD+levels in muscle cells (Fig. Finally, to evaluate functional effects of acipimox in C2C12 cells, we performed mitochondrial respiration assays in these cells 24 h after acipimox 10 mmol/L acipimox incubation. Together, the data obtained in C2C12 cells strengthen the concept that acipimox, as an NAD+precursor, has direct effects on skeletal muscle mitochondrial respiration and metabolism independent of plasma NEFA levels. D: Evaluation of mitochondrial respiration at the basal condition or after oligomycin and FCCP administration in C2C12 cells 24 h after acipimox 10 mmol/L incubation (n= 6). We showed that treatment for 2 weeks with a standard clinical dosage of acipimox, an NAD+precursor, caused a rebound effect in plasma NEFA concentrations when measured after omission of the morning dose of acipimox following overnight fasting, which was paralleled by reduced insulin sensitivity. We and others have previously shown that acute elevation of plasma NEFA may actually decrease mitochondrial biogenesis and function (21,39,40). In concert with a direct effect of the NAD+precursor acipimox on mitochondrial function, we observed that in humans, acipimox increased ex vivo mitochondrial oxidative capacity and ATP production despite the potential deleterious elevated plasma NEFA concentrations. Indeed, in C2C12 myotubes, acipimox had a direct effect on enhancing NAD+levels. 