These workers explored another aspect of immunological recognition by immunizing rabbits with the peptide YALKRQGRTLYG and determining whether analogues containing alpha - greater than aza-beta3replacements could compete with the original peptide for binding to the resulting antisera. The ELISA format was used to ask whether alpha/beta-peptide2or any of the four possible 18-mers with the alphaalphaalphabeta3pattern,3a-d(Figure1), could be recognized by polyclonal anti-Bim BH3 antibodies. For the commercial BimBH3 antibody preparation, no antibody binding could be detected to immobilized samples of any of these five alpha/beta-peptides (Figure2a). In addition, none of these alpha/beta-peptides could competitively disrupt commercial antibody binding to immobilized1(Figure2b). Such a difference could arise if the conformation recognized by the antibodies is not alpha-helical. These results suggest that the failure of the polyclonal Bim BH3 antibody preparation to recognize alpha/beta-peptides2and3a-dis not due to changes in the extent or type of secondary structure sampled by these Bim BH3 alpha/beta analogues relative to the prototype alpha-peptide. (b) Sequences of Bim BH3-derived peptides. The conventional single-letter code is used to indicate alpha residue identity. Thex-axis represents the concentration of peptide in solutions used during the plate-coating step. "No peptide immobilized" is a negative control. (b) Competitive ELISA analysis of peptides in solution inhibiting the binding of commercial anti-BimBH3 antibody to immobilized peptide1. None of the alpha/beta-peptide analogues inhibits binding to immobilized1at the highest alpha/beta-peptide concentration tested (43 muM). Experiments using commercial polyclonal Bim BH3 antibody indicate that antibodies capable of recognizing alpha-peptide1do not cross react with alpha/beta-peptides2or3a-d; however, these experiments do not test whether antibodies can be produced that recognize alpha/beta-peptides. Egg yolks from control chickens injected with adjuvant but no peptide contained negligible amounts of antibodies with these recognition capabilities ("FCA" data points, Figure3a, b). Conversely, alpha/beta-peptide2is more effective than alpha-peptide1at disrupting interaction of anti-2with immobilized2(Figure3d). In addition, the competitive ELISA data are consistent with the lack of cross-reactivity observed for commercial Bim BH3 polyclonal antibody with alpha/beta-peptide2. Inoculation of chickens with alpha-peptide1or alpha/beta-peptide2conjugated to bovine gamma-globulin with adjuvant stimulates production of peptide-specific responses ("anti-peptide" IgY antibodies). (a, b) Indirect ELISA analysis of IgY antibodies induced by injection of conjugated alpha-peptide1or alpha/beta-peptide2, respectively. Thex-axis represents the dilution of egg yolk used for each condition. Peptide4bis included as a negative control to account for nonspecific inhibition of antibody-peptide complex formation by a solution of unrelated peptide in DMSO. (c) Competitive ELISA analysis of peptides in solution (peptide competitor) inhibiting the binding of egg yolk derived-antibodies to immobilized peptides. Cross-recognition was probed for all combinations of antibodies and sPLA2 fragment analogues. These results show that for each antibody preparation, the soluble form of the peptide hapten is among the most potent inhibitors of complex formation with immobilized hapten, as expected. NoneAlthough analogues of a 9-mer GP33 epitope with two or three alpha - greater than beta replacements fail to stimulate IFN-gamma production in splenocytes from mice that have recovered from LCMV infection, these observations do not indicate whether alpha/beta-peptides can induce activation and proliferation of peptide-specific CD8+T-cells under other conditions. Similar experiments using splenocytes from mice injected with alpha/beta-peptide8reveal the absence of a significant population of CD8+T-cells that produce IFN-gamma in response to pulsation with alpha/beta-peptide8, which suggests that this alpha/beta-peptide is unable to stimulate expansion of peptide-specific CD8+T-cells in mice. alpha-Peptide7also fails to induce IFN-gamma production in splenocytes from mice injected with alpha/beta-peptide8, confirming that injection of alpha-peptide7was responsible for the increased frequency of CD8+T-cells that can be induced to produce IFN-gamma in response to ex vivo pulsation with7. In addition, we show that antibodies can be raised against alpha/beta-peptide as haptens (i.e., conjugated to proteins that contain helper T-cell epitopes) but that these antibodies do not strongly cross-react with homologous alpha-peptides. Assays were conducted using 96-well flat bottom Nunc Maxisorp plates. Subsequent steps of these ELISAs were run according to the protocol described above. Assays were conducted using 96-well flat bottom Nunc Maxisorp plates. 