We found that the antitumor effect elicited by Adv/CD-TK was modest and independent of suicide gene activity but that HER2/neu-specific adaptive immunity was induced and could be amplified by GM-CSF to render improved systemic protection. Dose-dependent expression of GFP was observed in both TUBO and D2F2/E2 cell lines in 24 h (None), showing uptake of the adenovirus and GFP expression in ?40% (MOI = 1) to ?90% of (MOI = 10) cells. Results are presented as percent survival relative to the no virus control sample (***p less than 0.001 relative to control)To determine the appropriate MOI forin vitroanalysis, TUBO cells were co-cultured with Adv/CD-TK at MOIs ranging from 0.1 to 104. At MOIs exceeding 10, increased cell death was observed in both TUBO (None) and D2F2/E2 (not shown) cells, indicating a cytotoxic effect with virus overload. Adv/CD-TK encodes two suicide genes that convert non-toxic prodrugs, 5-FC and GCV, to their active forms, 5-FU and GCV-MP respectively, to inhibit DNA synthesis and induce apoptosis (None). Similar results were obtained in D2F2/E2 cells (not shown), indicating that both tumor lines are sensitive to the CD conversion product, 5-FU. No significant change was observed after 48 h. These results are consistent with previous observations where cell survival and viability were assayed 5-14 d after treatment to allow for transgene expression, prodrug conversion, and the manifestation of toxicity. NoneA parallel experiment with D2F2/E2 cells yielded similar results (not shown). Results are presented as A450 readings of the colorimetric assay (*p less than 0.05)To test the induction of anti-Adv immunity, mice inoculated with TUBO tumors were injected i.t. The ability of Adv/CD-TK itself, without the administration of prodrugs, to induce antitumor activity in TUBO tumor-bearing mice was assessed. A significant reduction in tumor growth rate was observed when 24 mm3tumors were treated with Adv/CD-TK alone, but not when Adv/CD-TK was administered to 60 mm3tumors. Antibodies to tumor-associated neu were elevated compared to the PBS control group, whether in the context of 24 or 60mm3tumors (p less than 0.05). Mice were inoculated with TUBO tumors on the contralateral flank on day 19 and monitored for an additional 20 d. Development of the secondary tumor was delayed in the Adv/CD-TK-treated mice, suggesting the induction of a systemic antitumor immune response (None). To test if the generation of cytotoxic agents via CD-TK further impacts tumor growth or alters immunity, TUBO tumors (?60 mm3) were treated with three i.t. Because utilization of prodrug was not beneficial in the mammary tumor models in immune-competent mice, the clinical benefit observed in prostate cancer patients may be attributed to Adv-induced tumor immunity. Treatment with Adv/GM significantly reduced tumor growth rate compared to PBS control and rendered full regression in 3 of 9 mice (p less than 0.05,None). (C) Neu-specific total IgG, IgG1, and IgG2a antibody were measured on day 48 (*p less than 0.05 relative to PBS control)In a repeated experiment of Adv/GM, TUBO-bearing mice were treated with PBS or Adv/GM when tumors were ?35 mm3( Fig. Intra-tumoral adenoviral therapy was further tested in the mouse mammary tumor cell line D2F2/E2. Results are presented as IFNgamma spot forming units (SFU) per 106SC (*p less than 0.05)To better understand the process and improve the outcomes of adenoviral immunotherapy which delayed disease recurrence in human trials, the current study sought to characterize the systemic antitumor immunity induced by i.t. Adv/CD-TK therapy using two tumor models, and test the efficacy with GM-CSF gene expression. Whilein vitrodata suggested therapeutic activity of the Adv/CD-TK with prodrugs,in vivoresults showed limited anti-tumor activity that did not exceed the effect of the virus itself. Neu-specific Ab was significantly elevated in TUBO tumor bearing mice that received Adv/CD-TK with and without prodrug therapy. TUBO tumor-bearing mice treated with Adv/GM showed significantly delayed tumor growth compared to control group mice. To determine if tumor immunity can be further enhanced, Adv/CD-TK expressing IL-12 was tested in a preclinical model of prostate cancer. The introduction of GM-CSF via the Adv vector promoted HER2/neu immunity and protected mice from secondary tumor challenge. 