Accrual into the START study proceeded in two phases. The National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), the primary funder, required an initial pilot phase to establish feasibility of accrual with a goal of 900 participants. The pilot phase demonstrated that enrolling over 900 participants in a limited number of sites was feasible within 1 year, once study drugs became available to sites from the Central Drug Repository (CDR). The expansion of the trial with 114 new sites enrolling in the definitive phase increased the diversity of sites and countries, resulting in a higher percentage of women and people of colour enrolled as study participants. Continuity of drug supply was critical to the successful enrolment of the study. The financial crisis that hit Europe also affected enrolment. In the definitive phase, START added 114 sites enrolling in 35 countries - of which 13 sites were new to the INSIGHT network - which required an increased mobilization of ICC, SCC and network resources to deal with the lengthy processes for regulatory approval and drug importation and delayed the onset of accrual at many sites with the potential for high enrolment. As seen in Figures 3and4, the aforementioned challenges impacted the time from finalization of the protocol to the first enrolment by a site. The median days to site opening in the pilot phase differed by region. Sites added in the definitive phase in countries that did not participate in the pilot phase, such as India, Malaysia, Nigeria and Uganda, had a longer time from site opening to first enrolment as a consequence of approvals needed to access CDR drugs, translate study documents and complete other country-specific regulatory requirements. Days from site opening to first participant enrolled, after regulatory and network approval. The INSIGHT network included community representation at all stages of the development of the START study, from initial concept to completion of accrual3. In addition, the table shows average enrolment in the main study at sites participating in one or more substudies. Enrolment took place largely within the 1-year pilot phase after drugs became available from the CDR and the 3-year definitive phase prior to the sample-size re-estimation. Some sites reported that potential participants they had lined up and included in their initial recruitment estimates were lost during the wait for the CDR to open. 