The effectiveness of a behavioralWeb-TXfor substance use disorders (theTherapeutic Education System[TES]; (Bickel, Marsch, Buchhalter, Badger, 2008), when substituted for two hours per week of usual care counseling, was recently demonstrated in a multisite study conducted within the National Institute on Drug Abuse Clinical Trials Network (Campbell, et al, 2014); Clinical trial registration: NCT01104805). Participants who received the TES intervention (N = 255) compared to those who received standard care without TES (N=252) had higher rates of drug abstinence (mean =11.1 versus 8.8 abstinent half-weeks; p=0.008) and better treatment retention at the end of the 12-week study (48% versus 40% retained; HR =0.72, CI - 0.57, 0.92, p = 0.01). It is not clear, however, that all treatments are equally effective across the spectrum of substances. Clinical outcomes for web-based interventions have not to our knowledge been examined as a function of primary drug. Drug abstinence data were analyzed using generalized linear mixed models to estimate effects of four variables: treatment condition, time (assessment half-week), primary substance of abuse, and baseline drug use status (positive vs. negative based on urinalysis and self-report). Retention at week 12 was analyzed using a generalized linear model and was modeled as a function of treatment condition, primary substance of abuse, baseline drug use status, and their possible interactions (retained in the final model ifp less than .10). The parent study was also not powered to detect differences by primary substance of abuse. Ability to objectively detect recent drug use varied markedly across the substance classes and may have influenced the outcomes. While this was partially countered by our modeling approach that uses all available data, it also reflects the reality of treatment outcome research. Web-based treatment delivery systems may increase accessibility of interventions that are effective for treatment of the majority of substance use disorders. 