HNSCC is a heterogeneous group of tumors located in the oral cavity, oropharynx, hypopharynx and larynx. Originally, tobacco and/or alcohol exposure were the main risk factors for HNSCC, but in an expanding subset of patients with oropharyngeal carcinoma, HPV infection has been described in the last two decades as a crucial etiologic agent. NoneAlthough patients with HPV-associated tumors are more often diagnosed at advanced stages of the disease with large metastatic lymph nodes, their prognosis is reported to be significantly better than that of patients with non-HPV induced cancers. However,in vivo, HPV-positive tumors were more sensitive to radio- and chemotherapy in immunocompetent mice. NoneMoreover, in addition to the high proportion of relapses, especially in HPV-negative patients, conventional therapy remains associated with significant toxicity. Consequently, a better understanding of the interplay between the tumor microenvironment, HPV and the infiltrating immune cells is essential. However, a complex profile of the particular tumor-infiltrating immune cell subsets, including antigen-presenting cells, has not been evaluated to date. Lymph node metastases were histologically confirmed (pN+) in 90.5% of HPV-positive and 66.7% of HPV-negative patients, but this difference did not reach a statistical significance. NoneNoneNoneFrequency of HPV-positive and HPV-negative tumorsThe presence of tumor-infiltrating leukocytes, particularly CD8+T cells, was shown to be a strong prognostic marker in various types of cancer; therefore, we analyzed the numbers and proportions of tumor-infiltrating immune cells in HPV-positive and HPV-negative HNSCC patients. To evaluate the subtypes of tumor-infiltrating CD4+T cells, tumor-derived single cell suspensions were stimulated with PMA and ionomycin in the presence of Brefeldin A and analyzed by flow cytometry. The total numbers of mDCs in HPV-positive tumor samples showed a statistically significant increase compared to HPV-negative samples; however, the frequency of pDCs and monocytes/macrophages were not statistically significantly different (None). There are two major causative agents of HNSCC, namely tobacco and/or alcohol consumption and a high-risk HPV infection. Although HPV-positive HNSCC patients are often diagnosed at a late stage of the disease with developed nodal metastases, their prognosis is significantly better compared to HPV-negative cancers. It has been convincingly shown that a high density of tumor-infiltrating CD8+T lymphocytes is predictive of a favorable clinical outcome in different types of cancers, including HNSCC. NoneBecause most of the studies focusing on the quantification of tumor-infiltrating immune cells in HNSCC were retrospective and based on immunohistochemical data, the detailed phenotype of CD8+T cells had not yet been evaluated. Importantly, recent HNSCC studiesNonesuggest that other characteristics of the intratumoral CD8+T lymphocytes, such as their location within the tumor, PD-1 expression, as well as the expression of HLA-class I, SCINDERIN and EPHRIN-A1 in the tumor cells might have a strong impact on the prognostic value of the CD8+T cells. NoneOn the other hand, Tregs have been described as a positive prognostic factor in colorectal cancer and lymphomas. NoneHowever, the detailed analysis of tumor specificity and viral specificity of T cells present in the head and neck tumors needs to be performed in future studies. High numbers of CD68+macrophages infiltrating HNSCC were shown to correlate with lymph node metastasis, extracapsular spread and an advanced stage of disease. As nodal metastases were detected in 90.5% of the patients with HPV-positive and 66.7% of the patients with HPV-negative tumor samples, the differences in CXCL12 levels most likely reflect this fact. Although tumor-derived cells of HPV-positive tumors also expressed higher levels of proinflammatory cytokines, namely IL-2, IL-17, IL-23 and IFNgamma, these differences did not reach statistical significance due to high variability in the samples. Interestingly, the HPV-positive tumor samples expressed significantly lower levels ofCox-2mRNA compared to the HPV-negative samples, which is in accordance with a previous report stating an improved outcome in HPV-positive HNSCC patients. In agreement with these results, we observed higherPD-1expression in HPV-positive tumor samples compared to HPV-negative tumors. 