This framework may be better suited to clarifying the neurobiology of atypical behaviors, such as impulsivity and other types of ADHD-related behaviors, and provides important context for the current report. We recently assessed the functional connectivity of the NAcc in children with and without ADHD and found that, on average, in ADHD, NAcc was atypically connected to regions of the default network, cortical regions involved in control processes, posterior insula, and thalamus (Costa Dias et al., 2012). It readily applies to ADHD because children with ADHD are at elevated risk of addiction, and both addiction and ADHD have been strongly associated with dysfunction in ascending dopaminergic systems that relate to reward response (Volkow et al., 2009,2011a,2011b). For instance, Subject A with ADHD may have typical connections between the NAcc and prefrontal cortex and amygdala, but have an atypical connection between the NAcc and the dorsal striatum/motor cortex, which could lead to impulsive decision-making. One particularly attractive approach derives from graph theory. The study found that both groups (children with ADHD and typically developing children) could be classified into unique, but similar neuropsychological profiles. Furthermore, children with ADHD from each profile showed atypical scores in very specific neuropsychological measures. The study found that the sample was organized into communities, which were associated with specific patterns of physiological response, brain connectivity of the amygdala, and, most importantly, long-term outcomes. 24-48 h depending on the preparation). In summary, 90 participants (54 controls, 36 children with ADHD) were included in the analysis of delay discounting. In this study, we combined two methods for addressing motion. vectors), one per participant. Community detection analysis was then performed in two steps. correlation) between any given subject pair. Second, the community detection algorithm was applied to the distance matrix. After identifying the communities in the network of children, we performed a direct comparison of connectivity maps between groups (i.e. In order to identify which networks were atypically connected to the NAcc in each subgroup of children, we defined brain networks in a sample of adults, using community detection, and used them to identify the systems in which differences between groups coalesced. Participant characteristics and sample overview are summarized inTable 1. Only eight subjects switched subgroups. We next found that children with ADHD from different subgroups have distinct patterns of atypical connections when compared to the relative controls (Figs. Finally, children with ADHD in subgroup C, compared to controls in the same subgroup, displayed several atypical connections. Finally, in subgroup C, ADHD children showed atypical connections to several networks, but most prominently, the cingulo-opercular network. These theories have been supported by studies using neuropsychological data, which showed that not all individuals with ADHD have deficits in all core neuropsychological domains (Fair et al., 2012;Nigg et al., 2005;Sonuga-Barke et al., 2010). As in those previous studies, we verified the value of community detection as a tool to identify subgroups of children with and without ADHD based on relevant disorder characteristics (temperament measures, functional connectivity of brain networks). The default network was positively connected to the reward system. Importantly, the distinct relationships of connectivity to the default system and/or the task control systems varied according to the community assignment in both children with and without ADHD. The model asserts that a balanced interaction between all of the systems is necessary for adequate inhibitory control and decision-making (seeFig. not impulsive) decision-making. Atypical connections between NAcc and control/attention networks were also evident in the three subgroups, but involved networks and regions were, again, specific to each subgroup. ADHD children in subgroups A and B were characterized by atypical connectivity between the NAcc and control networks. Children with ADHD within subgroup A displayed specifically atypical connections between the NAcc and regions of the attention networks: stronger negative connectivity with ventral attention network and weaker negative connectivity with dorsal attention network. Only one of the ADHD subgroups had atypical delay discounting and, at the same time, atypical activity level scores (subgroup A). As the delay-discounting task, the TMCQ subscales supported that ADHD neurotypes distinguished by brain connectivity patterns of the reward system may be discriminated from typically developing individuals by specific behavioral characteristics. We used Volkow et al. The ADHD children in subgroups B and C did not have atypical delay discounting or activity level relative to their peers. These data suggest that in these ADHD youth, despite having distinct connectivity from their neurotype peers, they maintained a balance to support normative behavior, as measured by the delay-discounting task and activity level. This supports the idea that in each ADHD subgroup, specific brain processing mechanisms may lead to distinctive ways of impulsivity. Our findings of atypical inter-communication between brain networks in ADHD are similar to the framework highlighted bySonuga-Barke and Fairchild (2012). This theory relates to our findings in a few ways. Our findings support that combining graph theory with neuroimaging data may represent a valuable approach for classifying children with ADHD and typical development; for informing ADHD heterogeneity; and for investigating ADHD neurobiology. 