Therefore, we hypothesized that in a multiethnic cohort of men and women, higher baseline levels of LP-IR, large VLDL-P, small LDL-P, small HDL-P, and TG; lower levels of large HDL-P and HDL-C; and larger mean VLDL particle size and smaller mean LDL and HDL particle size would be associated with incident diabetes, independent of established risk factors and potential confounders. Participants with diabetes at the baseline study visit were excluded. The exact method was used for tied event times, which were uncommon. Potential differences in associations with incident diabetes by sex, race/ethnicity, or baseline use of lipid-lowering medications or HT were evaluated using multiplicative interaction terms and stratified models. Except for total HDL-P and medium VLDL-P, all of these remained significantly associated with incident diabetes in Cox proportional hazards models adjusted for age, sex, and race/ethnicity (data not shown). Mean baseline glucose was substantially higher among cases than noncases (Table 1). Among untreated participants, there were no significant interactions between race/ethnicity and any of the IR-related lipoproteins, lipids, insulin, or HOMA-IR in relation to incident diabetes. HRs were attenuated with additional adjustment for glucose or insulin or HOMA-IR. None remained strongly associated with incident diabetes if adjusted for the ratio of TG to HDL-C, with similar results if adjusted for TG, HDL-C, or both (data not shown). Conversely, the association of low HDL-C with incident diabetes risk persisted after adjusting for large VLDL-P but not after adjusting for LP-IR (Table 2). In contrast, TG and the TG-to-HDL-C ratio remained associated with incident diabetes adjusted for glucose, insulin, or HOMA-IR but not adjusted for LP-IR. For insulin and HOMA-IR, HRs (Q4 vs. Q1) remained significantly associated with diabetes if adjusted for LP-IR, large VLDL-P, or the TG-to-HDL-C ratio, but not when simultaneously adjusted for LP-IR and glucose, which both added significantly to diabetes risk in all models. In contrast, associations with diabetes were not significant for HDL-C, TG, or TG-to-HDL-C ratio if adjusted for LP-IR. Furthermore, LP-IR, large VLDL-P, small LDL-P, TG, and TG-to-HDL-C ratio, but not insulin or HOMA-IR, were significantly associated with diabetes risk in each category of baseline glucose ( less than 90, 90-99, and 100-125 mg/dL). These results suggest that IR-related lipoprotein and lipid indices, particularly LP-IR, large VLDL-P, mean VLDL size, TG, and TG-to-HDL-C ratio may robustly add to glucose, insulin, and HOMA-IR in identifying risk of incident diabetes. In the Insulin Resistance Atherosclerosis Study (IRAS) (ncases/total = 130/830 over a mean of 5.2 years), higher total LDL-P, small HDL-P, larger mean VLDL size, and smaller HDL size were associated with incident diabetes adjusted for age, sex, and race and small HDL-P and large VLDL size persisted when adjusted for both HDL-C and TG (6). Associations among treated participants and HT users likely reflect their metabolic risk before starting medications. 