In this report, we demonstrate that the Pim protein kinases control metabolic pathways that are necessary for the induction of cell growth by activated K-RasG12V. However, even in the absence of all three Pim kinase isoforms, c-Myc is able to regulate cellular metabolism and permit K-RasG12V-stimulated cell growth. Re-expression of Pim kinases in TKO cells conferred the ability for these cells to proliferate (data not shown). NAC treatment promoted cell viability against K -RasG12V-induced cell death (Figures 2d and e). Loss of Pim kinases blocked the increased transcription of these metabolic enzymes induced by activated Ras (Figure 4b). In WT MEFs, K-RasG12Vtransduction induced PPP enzymes (e.g., G6pd, Pgd, Rpia, andRpe), but oncogenic Ras is markedly less effective in inducing these enzyme changes in TKO MEFs (Figure 5c). These results indicate that K-RasG12Vmediates metabolic programming by controlling the mRNA transcription of key enzymes, and these mRNA changes require Pim kinases. However, Ras transduction only induced minor changes in the level of these enzymes in TKO MEFs, further demonstrating the importance of Pim kinases in the regulation of Ras-induced metabolism. Additionally, gene expression array and qPCR analyses indicated that mitochondrial genes involved in oxidative phosphorylation (e.g., Ndufb9, Atp6ap2 and Suclg1) are significantly down regulated in TKO MEFs (Supplementary Figure S5C). Results from UPLC/MS/MS analysis indicated that intracellular levels of NADP+but not NADPH were significantly lower in TKO compared to WT MEFs (Figure 7a;Supplementary Figure S6A). Compared to WT, TKO MEFs showed a slight reduction in GSH levels but a much lower level of GSSG, indicating that total the glutathione level was low in TKO MEFs (Figure 7b). Experiments demonstrate that cellular Sod mRNA and enzyme activities in TKO MEFs were significantly lower than WT and not increased when K-RasG12Vwas expressed (Supplementary Figure S6D and S6E). This loss of detoxifying activity could in part account for the marked increase in ROS observed in TKO MEFs after transduction with activated K-Ras. Having observed that c-Myc transduction restored mitochondrial DNA content in TKO MEFs to the level of WT MEFs (Supplementary Figure S6F), the role of c-Myc in these MEF cells was further examined. Additionally, the transduction of c-Myc into these cells enhanced Sod2 protein levels (Figure 7f). These defects were shown to impact the ability of K-RasG12Vto induce genes changes in these MEFs. Additionally, the levels ofSod 1, 2, and 3, Gpx4andPrdx3mRNAs and Sod2 and Gpx4 protein (Supplementary Figure S6C-E) were lower in TKO compared to WT MEFs, further suggesting that the ability of these cells to detoxify ROS produced through metabolic pathways was limited. c-Myc expression restored NAD(P)+levels in TKO MEFs, increased Sod2 protein to nearly wild type levels, and consequently, decreased ROS accumulation by K-RasG12Vtransduction. 