We extended our findings to tumor spheres generated from GBM patients and determined that inhibition of CK2alpha decreased tumor sphere self-renewal, size, andin vivotumorigenic potential of these cell lines. Enhanced CK2alpha expression or activity has been observed in a variety of solid tumors including GBM. To verify that CK2alpha is overexpressed in GBM we analyzed primary samples from GBM patients. S1A). S1A). S1B). To verify that CK2alpha is involved in GBM tumorigenesis, we modulated CK2 expression in two GBM cell lines, U87-MG and U138. 2C). To confirm the importance of CK2alpha, we decreased both CK2alpha and CK2beta expression 5- to 10-fold using siRNAs in both U87-MG and U138 cell lines (Fig. S2A). S2B). U87-MG and U138 transduced with the GFP reporter treated with siRNA to CK2alpha exhibited a 2- to 3-fold reduction in both beta-catenin expression and transcriptional activity as measured by GFP expression (Fig. Conducting QPCR on the U87-MG siRNA-treated cells, we determined that cells deficient in CK2alpha, but not CK2beta, had a 2- to 3-fold reduction in bothOCT4andNANOGmRNA (Fig. We initially verified that our GBM tumor spheres were enriched for BTIC by monitoring CD133 expression. Further analysis of the CD133+ subpopulation showed that CK2alpha mRNA expression was not significantly different compared to the CD133- group (Supplemental Fig. S3). Consistent with our previous findings, we also observed a 2- to 3-fold decrease in beta-catenin levels and a 2-fold reduction inOCT4andNANOGmRNA levels in the shCK2alpha+Dox tumor spheres compared with the control tumor spheres (Fig. To determine if the decrease in GBM stem cell markers was functionally significant we analyzed stem cell phenotypes in our tumor spheres transduced with shRNA to CK2alpha. In addition, decreasing CK2alpha expression reduced the number of tumor spheres that formed, ~2-fold compared with the shCK2alpha-Dox tumor spheres, and ~10-fold when treated with the CK2 inhibitors, TBBz or CX-4945 (Fig. S4C). Here we demonstrate for the first time that decreasing CK2alpha expression or reducing its activity through small molecule inhibitors decreases the BTIC subpopulation in GBM. The loss of these BTIC regulators resulted in a loss of GBM "stemness" as evident through the decrease in tumor sphere size, growth, and sphere-forming capacity (Figure 8). Decreasing CK2alpha expression using siRNA resulted in a reduction in Notch transcriptional activity that resulted in a reduction in the stem cell subpopulation (47). The seven GBM tissue samples were harvested from primary GBM patients and the tissue was immediately frozen in dry ice. The GBM patients were separated into high or low CK2alpha expression and graphed according to patient survival. A) Boxplot representing the relative expression of CK2alpha from three different microarray sources. Reducing expression or inhibiting CK2alpha activity decreased GBM tumorigenesis in U138 cells. B, cell growth analysis of U138 cells treated with CK2 inhibitors TBB or TBBz. Tumor spheres with elevated levels CK2alpha expression may lead to a worse prognosis for GBM patients. C, QPCR analysis of sorted tumor spheres for CK2alpha or CK2beta mRNA expression. Reducing CK2alpha expression decreases beta-catenin expression and activity in a second tumor sphere line (TS #2) derived from GBM patients. 