Our results show that obesity is associated with activation of KCs, which leads to migration of RHMs into the liver augmenting the severity of obesity-induced hepatic inflammation. Isolation and characterization of NPCs from lean and obese mouse liver. A: Schematic diagram of isolation of NPCs from NC-fed lean vs. HFD-fed obese mouse liver. 2None). 2None). F: Western blot analysis of TNF-alpha protein expression in PKH26+cells from lean and obese mouse NPCs. Because CCR2 is highly expressed in the R3 cells (Fig. 2None). 2None). C: Whole-liver FITC+KC numbers from mice fed NC were compared with mice after 12 weeks of HFD feeding. FACS-sorted RHMs and KCs were analyzed for gene expression. We then investigated the gene expression changes induced by the HFD within each cell type. Venn diagram analyses revealed that these two cell types responded quite differently to the HFD (Fig. A: Principal component analysis of expressed genes in KCs and RHMs from NC- or HFD-fed mice. B: Bar chart shows the number of differentially expressed genes between cell types (KC vs. RHM) and diets (NC vs. HFD). C: Venn diagram shows common and distinct differentially expressed genes induced by the HFD within cell types. D: Heat map shows differentially expressed inflammatory response genes between KCs and RHMs from mice fed NC and the HFD in a four-way comparison. RNA-seq studies used three biological replicates per each group. We adjusted these gene counts to reflect the number of KCs (*1.17) and RHMs (*5.7) present in the liver in HFD-fed mice compared with NC-fed mice. The top 16 KC marker genes listed are expressed at least fivefold higher in KC vs. RHM from NC- or HFD-fed mice. RNA-seq studies used three biological replicates per each group. The first is the resident hepatic macrophage, the KC, which shows high levels of inflammatory markers after being activated and appears to be a major source of liver-derived MCP-1 after HFD. In addition, upon HFD feeding, there is a marked increase in the accumulation of fresh RHMs, and these cells are distinct from KCs. This leads to the view that in HFD mice, obesity-resident KCs secrete increased amounts of MCP-1. Overall, LSEC marker gene expression counts were low and not different between FITC-labeled KCs versus PKH26+RHMs (data not shown). In addition, a large set of inflammatory pathway genes was induced in the RHMs from HFD mice, whereas inflammatory pathway induction in KCs was only modest. Given this approximately sixfold increase in RHM numbers in HFD mice combined with the increased RHM inflammatory gene induction per cell, we suggest that RHMs are the major contributors to the hepatic inflammatory state in obesity. Obesity is associated with a large increase in RHMs, which are a major cause of the inflammatory state in the livers of HFD/obese mice, whereas KCs provide a trigger for this massive RHM infiltration. Moreover, we provide the transcriptome analysis of KCs and RHMs. 