Due to this effect, HDAC inhibitors have recently emerged as potential cancer therapeutic agents. Interestingly, HDAC inhibitors share common structural features so that they can properly interact with different portions of the catalytic channel of the enzyme. A range of natural and synthetic HDAC inhibitors have been characterized for their antitumor activities. In the following sections, we describe the clinical development of different classes of HDAC inhibitors. Vorinostat showed potent apoptotic and anti-proliferative effect in both type I and type II human endometrial cancers by modifying the expression of specific genes related to the insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) receptor signaling pathway [38]. In murine and human lung cancer cell lines and genetically engineered mouse lung cancer models, Vorinostat reduced cancer cell growth, cyclin D1 and cyclin E expressions, but increased p27 expression, histone acetylation and apoptosis [41]. A recent study concluded that romidepsin and bortezomib cooperatively inhibit A549 NSCLC cell proliferation by altering the histone acetylation status, expression of cell cycle regulators and matrix metalloproteinases [50]. Investigation of romidepsin for the treatment of inflammatory breast cancer (IBC), the most metastatic variant of locally advanced breast cancer, revealed that it potentially induced destruction of IBC tumor emboli and lymphatic vascular architecture [51]. A preclinical study of belinostat in three hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines (PLC/PRF/5, Hep3B and HepG2) showed that it can inhibit cell growth in a dose dependent manner and induce histone acetylation in all three cell lines [63]. A phase II study tested the activity and tolerability of pracinostat in patients with intermediate or high risk myelofibrosis (MF) where pracinostat was shown to have clinical benefit and modest activity in patients with MF [72]. A phase II study was conducted to evaluate the safety and efficacy of givinostat in patients with JAK2V617Fpositive myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPN), a type of blood cancer [80]. This synergistic inhibition was also tested in patients with advanced solid tumor using CUDC-101, and the drug was found to induce histone H3 acetylation in some of the patients. Table 2summarizes all the hydroxamic acid based HDAC inhibitors as potential therapeutics for various cancers that were in clinical trials. This benzamide derivative HDAC inhibitor is selective for both Class I and IV histone deacetylases [103]. It is a Class I selective HDAC inhibitor and is well tolerated either as a single agent or in combination with other drugs [109]. These compounds represent another class of HDAC inhibitor with simple structures that showed clinical potential in various studies. They both display HDAC inhibition for Class I and IIa HDACs, but they tend to be less potent in inhibiting the HDAC activity than the hydroxamic acid based HDAC inhibitors. VPA in combination with S-1, an oral fluoropyrimidine derivative consisting of 5-fluorouracil, was tested in pancreatobiliary tract cancers and showed manageable safety and preliminary antitumor activity in these patients [117]. Various other natural products from different sources are also found to inhibit HDAC activity. Epoxides are another known group of inhibitors of zinc dependent HDAC enzymes. Epoxide bearing natural compounds such as trapoxins and depudecin are reported to form covalent bonds with HDACs [144]. Structures of thioester- and epoxide-based HDAC inhibitors. As discussed here, a number of structurally distinct classes of HDAC inhibitors (hydroxamic acid, benzamide, cyclic peptide, short chain fatty acid) have been tested in clinical trials. Structure of representative HDAC inhibitors and their pharmacophores. Other studies also confirmed that hydroxamic acid is generally a more potent HDAC inhibitor than carboxylic acid [161]. As a result, HDAC inhibitor design has involved these three modifications, as evident from several articles and reviews [33,162,163]. Thus finding the optimal structural requirements for HDAC inhibition is essential for developing more potent and specific inhibitors of different isoforms of HDAC. Many other structural classes that can inhibit HDAC activity may exist as well. The efforts to discover more efficient and selective HDAC inhibitors have been continually intensified ever since HDAC inhibitors were found active in various clinical trials. Computer modeling has played a critical role in understanding the enzyme-drug interactions, identifying potent inhibitors and obtaining quantitative structure activity relationships of HDAC inhibitors. The structural details obtained from docking studies can be used for guiding structural modifications of the inhibitors to discover more potent and specific inhibitors for different isoforms of HDAC, or for rational drug design. The same strategy can also be applied to the HDAC inhibitors that are in clinical trials for guiding structural modification to make the drug more potent and isoform specific HDAC inhibitors with potentially reduced toxicities. Using HDAC inhibitors that are already in clinical trials as the lead query molecules, shape based screening can identify new structural scaffolds with entirely different zinc binding domain, linker, or cap groups. The same protocol was also used in identifying structural variations that regulate the interaction of HDAC inhibitors against Class II HDAC enzymes [199]. A docking-enabled pharmacophore model also identified HDAC8 inhibitors as anticancer agents [200]. QSAR studies also helped in the design, synthesis and biological evaluation of gamma-lactam-based HDAC inhibitors [202,203]. Thus lipophilicity increases the hydrophobic interaction between the surface of HDAC active site and HDAC inhibitor, which in turn improves the HDAC inhibitor activity [203]. While HDAC inhibitors alone have displayed anticancer activities in various cancers, a growing number of studies have demonstrated more efficient and tumor specific anticancer activities of HDAC inhibitors when they are given in combination with other drugs. This clearly underscore the potential of HDAC inhibitors in cancer treatment. Similarly, hydrophobic and bulky cap groups that bind to the surface region in the HDAC can increase the inhibitor potency. Having discovered the clinical benefits of HDAC inhibitors in various diseases, especially in cancers, there is an increasing need to develop more potent and tumor-specific HDAC inhibitors. However, disruption of multiple pathways by these inhibitors and the lack of specificity of these inhibitors to a target enzyme could contribute to the cytotoxicities that were found in many of the clinical trials. Virtual screening has also assisted in finding inhibitors for a specific HDAC enzyme. As such, clinical studies in combination with basic biological research and computer modeling should enable us to discover a greater variety of HDAC inhibitors specific for a given target, and also to develop tumor specific HDAC inhibitors. 