Intestinal immune homeostasis is maintained through a constant molecular dialogue between commensal microbiota, intestinal tissue cells and the mucosal immune systemNone. Th17 cells, dependent on the transcription factor retinoic acid-related orphan receptor-gammat (Rorgammat), represent a distinct interleukin (IL)-17A-producing CD4+T cell subset that contribute both to host defense from pathogens and to tissue pathologies in a number of inflammatory diseases and experimental models, including colitisNone. Murine models of CD4+T cell mediated colitis have also attributed a pathogenic role to IL-18 in the intestineNone. Therefore, the role of IL-18 in intestinal immune regulation, as well as the key cellular sources of this cytokine in the gut, remain unclearNone. Here, we demonstrate that intestinal epithelial cells (IEC) regulate colonic CD4+T cell homeostasis through production of IL-18. In accordance with elevated frequencies of colonic Th17 cells, colonic lamina propria leukocytes isolated fromIl18r1-/-mice and stimulated with alpha-CD3 produced significantly more IL-17A, but not GM-CSF or IL-22, when compared to WT controls (Figure 2d). In addition, expression of genes encoding the antimicrobial peptides S100A8 and S100A9 induced by IL-17A, but not IL-22-induced Reg3gamma, were significantly elevated in colonic tissue ofIl18r1-/-mice when compared to WT controls (Figure 2e). Furthermore, transcriptional analyses demonstrated thatIl18gene expression by intestinal epithelial cells (IEC) was elevated in the presence of commensal microbesNone. In contrast, IL-18R1-signaling played a global role in promoting Th1 cell differentiation following lymphopenic expansion in this competitive chimeric environment, as significantly lower frequencies of Th1 cells were derived fromIl18r1-/-CD4+T cells in colonic lamina propria, MLN and spleen (Figure 4c). We utilized a Th17 cell differentiation system whereby co-culture of naive (CD62L+CD44-CD25-) CD4+T cells with BM-derived dendritic cells (BMDC) in the presence of alpha-CD3, LPS and TGFbeta1results in efficient Th17 cell polarizationNone. Inhibition of Th17 cell differentiation by IL-18 appeared to occur independently of effects on cellular proliferation, or apoptosis (Supplementary Figure 4c,d). To assess the role of IL-18R1-signaling in induction of CD4+T cell mediated intestinal inflammation, we utilized the T cell transfer colitis model, whereby severe colitis and wasting disease are induced by reconstitution of lymphopenic hosts with naive CD4+T cellsNone. Immunofluorescence analysis of colonic tissue fromRag1-/-mice adoptively transferred with WT naive CD4+T cells demonstrated that IEC remain the major source of IL-18 within the inflamed colon, with IL-18 staining largely restricted to E-cadherin+cells of the intestinal epithelium (Figure 5a). Basal activation of innate immune pathways at mucosal surfaces, particularly within the gastrointestinal tract, is key for maintenance of tissue homeostasis. The factors that regulate IL-18 production by IEC require additional investigation, but it has been reported that commensal microbes may augmentIl18gene expression by IECNone. However, competitive bone marrow chimera experiments demonstrated that cell-intrinsic IL-18R1-signaling acted to limit colonic Th17 cell differentiation. Thus, IEC-derived IL-18 acts directly on colonic CD4+T cells to limit Th17 cell differentiation under homeostatic conditions. We also addressed the role of the IL-18/IL-18R1-signaling axis in the induction and regulation of CD4+T cell mediated intestinal inflammation. However, a comprehensive investigation into the cellular sources of bioactive IL-18 within the human intestine during health and disease could help explain its context-dependent protective or pathogenic activities. Finally, we found that although IL-18R1 signals were dispensable for the differentiation of intestinal Foxp3+Treg cells during steady state, expression of IL-18R1 by Foxp3+Treg cells was essential for Treg cell suppression of intestinal inflammation in the T cell transfer colitis model. In the context of IBD, elevated levels of IL-18 in intestinal tissues have been proposed to contribute to immunopathology by promoting effector Th1 cell responses. Thus, IL-18 acts as a tissue-specific modifying factor that boosts intestinal Foxp3+Treg cell effector function. They further suggest that strategies targeting IL-18 in the context of IBD should be employed with caution, as they may disrupt important regulatory circuits that act to limit intestinal inflammation. 