Using a large pharmacy claims database, we assessed determinants of adherence to oral antidiabetic medications in greater than 200,000 U.S. adults with type 2 diabetes. Pill burden was defined for all oral maintenance medications (diabetes and nondiabetes) filled and was computed by multiplying the average number of maintenance medications per month by the average number of oral maintenance pills per day, which was then converted to a 30-day period. We used a logistic regression analysis to examine the independent effects of patient, medication, and prescriber variables on diabetes medication adherence. The number of chronic disease conditions and patient total pill burden were highly positively correlated, and thus only patient pill burden was considered in the multivariate analysis. There were 17% of patients considered new to diabetes therapy. Previous exposure to diabetes therapy had a significant impact on adherence. Men were significantly more likely to be adherent than women. Education level and household income were both associated with adherence. Patients with nonendocrinologist specialist prescribers showed slightly but significantly lower adherence than those with primary care prescribers. Being new to diabetes therapy was associated with lower adherence. Although polypharmacy is an important risk factor for medication interactions and adverse events, our analyses suggest that it is associated with higher, rather than lower, odds of adherence to antidiabetic medications. In our study, characteristics that suggest a "healthier" patient (being younger, new to diabetes therapy, and taking few other medications) were all associated with lower odds of adherence to antidiabetic medications. Most provider factors that could be assessed in the database (provider age, sex, and geographic location) were not associated with medication adherence. These results may support other groups' findings that continuity of care (28) is associated with medication adherence and health outcomes in patients with diabetes. We used a modified measure of adherence to account for changing classes of antidiabetic medications, presumably due to side effects or lack of efficacy, which may be common in type 2 diabetes. 