2Thereafter, the macrophage was labelled as a tissue-residing cell that could eat and kill infectious pathogens, thereby contributing to frontline immunity. Macrophages were eventually incorporated into the reticulo-endothelial system in 1924, implying that they originate from, and reside and renew within, that tissue. 8In 1925 the findings of Florence Sabin showed that a proportion of these cells can be derived from the blood,9and in 1968 this was applied to all macrophages to form the mononuclear phagocyte system. Toward the end of the twentieth century a greater appreciation for macrophage heterogeneity was observed. 14This included a consensus that some macrophages could proliferate14and existed in the embryo long before definitive haematopoiesis. 19showed that murine Langerhans cells were not terminally differentiated and could proliferatein situto restore cells lost in inflammation. It became evident that many tissue macrophage populations are renewed independently of the bone marrow, and therefore their origin was scrutinized. Fate-mapping studies showed that a significant number of tissue macrophages are derived from primitive macrophages existing within the yolk sac or fetal liver. 28,29These macrophages are seeded into the tissues before birth and proliferate to populate the expanding tissue with resident macrophages. This is relatively well defined in other fields of immunity, such as T-cell biology;36however, the transcription factor profiles of macrophage subsets are still largely unknown. In 2012 the immunological genome consortium identified the zinc finger transcription factor Gata6 as peritoneal tissue-resident macrophage (pResMphi)-selective. 42Therefore, Gata6 contributes toward pResMphi persistence by regulating normal proliferative responses. 44found that loss of Gata6 results in decreased expression of the metabolic enzymeAspain pResMphi. 47This study44demonstrates that the persistence of a tissue-specific macrophage population is maintained in part by selective expression of a metabolic enzyme. 48Hence, its presence in a macrophage population is interesting, and the unknown mechanisms behind the apoptotic consequence ofAspadeletion may additionally influence specific macrophage functions. Two recent publications have implicated the tissue environment as the strongest factor in the determination of cell phenotype. Therefore some macrophage subsets present during the later stages of inflammation, including wound healing, may in fact be recovering tissue-resident macrophages. carried out a refined analysis of resolution-phase macrophages in the peritoneum. However, the authors noted that the cell environment in the peritoneum remained complicated by the co-existence of persisting tissue-resident macrophages and monocyte-derived cells, even up to 60 days after stimulus. 62Although there is no new consensus model for macrophage phenotypein vivo, it has been suggested that macrophages be named by origin, and the historical nomenclature maintained for cells with an embryonic origin. Hif1alphais usually induced by low oxygen and drives the expression of a wide array of genes. 