Apart from the immunosuppressive mechanisms exerted by cancer cells, suppressive immune cells present within the tumor also play a major role. MDSCs are a heterogeneous population of myeloid lineage defined by an immature state and the capacity to suppress T-cell responses. Ample evidence demonstrates that cancer tissues with high MDSC infiltration are associated with poor patient prognosis and resistance to various therapies. In the case of malignant disease, a tumor-driven 'microenvironment' arisesNonecharacterized by alterations in cytokine homeostasis. A component of the spice turmeric, curcumin downregulates the activity of several pro-inflammatory enzymes, such as cyclooxygenase-2 (COX2) and lipoxygenase. NoneThus, ATRA not an ideal candidate for MDSC depletion, as simultaneous Treg induction induced by ATRA treatment could further contribute to tumor development. NoneRecently, treatment of immature myeloid cells with the flavonoid Icariin and its derivative 3, 5, 7-trihydroxy-4'-emthoxy-8-(3-hydroxy-3-methylbutyl)-flavone (ICT) has been reported to decrease MDSC percentages, likely due to differentiation to mature myeloid cells. NoneInhibition of MMP-9, a downstream target of STAT3, lowered intratumoral MDSC levels and significantly delayed tumor growth. MDSCs have a remarkable ability to suppress both innate and adaptive immune responsesNonewhile promoting tumor angiogenesis, cell invasion and metastasis. NoneThe immunosuppressive effects of MDSCs depend on direct cell-cell contact through membranous receptors or short-lived soluble mediators. NoneIndeed, blockade of PGE2 synthesis in tumor-bearing mice and humans resulted in improved antitumor T-cell responses. NoneAs a result, T cells do not encounter tumor antigens presented by APCs in the lymph nodes, and as a result, are not activated. NoneMDSC-induced immunosuppression generates notorious hallmarks of cancer development, of which angiogenesis is crucial. That MDSCs directly stimulate the process of tumor development was demonstrated by the correlation between the inhibition of MDSC tumor migration and decreased tumor angiogenesis. This treatment also resulted in expansion of splenic T cells and a boost of their IFNgamma secretion after stimulation with the proper tumor antigenin vitro. Five-FU administration to tumor-bearing mice increased survival, possibly due to enhanced cytotoxic T-cell activation. Nevertheless, this novel approach to deplete MDSCs seems very promising, as it offers the advantage of specifically targeting both MDSC subsets. Some of the compounds reported to target MDSC development, expansion or activation can also counteract non-MDSC related tumor-promoting phenomena. Another dual acting compound able to inhibit angiogenesis is withaferin A. NoneHowever, while some of these compounds alone induce tumor regression due to their multiple tumor-targeting mechanisms, studies focus nowadays on combinatorial therapies with superior antitumor effects. NoneRecent studies suggest that combination of sunitinib with various immune-based cancer therapies may effectively enhance their efficacy (None). NoneThis can be explained by the fact that sunitinib might not be able to directly enhance intratumoral vaccine-induced T-cell infiltration. NoneAlso, addition of sunitinib to low-dose local tumor irradiation led to improved survival in a mouse glioma model. Meticulous orchestration of the timing and dosage of such treatments is necessary and justified since sunitinib has been previously reported to inhibit T-cell priming when administered simultaneously with therapeutic immunization, an effect that does not occur upon sequential administration. 