The peak nonfasting blood glucose value for each mouse over the experimental observation period was assessed and was significantly higher on average for CVB4-infected mice compared with mock-infected mice, which had tightly controlled blood glucose levels throughout (seeSupplementary Spreadsheet). Human insulin and C-peptide levels were compared in terminal serum samples from infected versus control nonfasted mice (Fig. In each experiment,INSgene expression was significantly lower in CVB4-infected mice compared with controls (Fig. A threefold decrease was observed inINSgene expression in grafts from CVB4-infected mice compared with controls (Fig. In contrast, glucagon (GCG) expression ratios were not significantly impacted (Fig. Thus, regardless of whether overt hyperglycemia was detected, significant decreases in both human C-peptide and insulin levels were detected in CVB4-infected animals. Histopathological examination of grafts from both CVB4-infected and mock-infected mice revealed intact islets without infiltrating inflammatory cells in grafts (Fig. 2None). Insulin-specific immunohistochemical stains revealed a decrease in the number of insulin-positive cells in the islets from infected mice compared with those from control mice (Fig. 2None). Glucagon-specific stains did not reveal glucagon depletion in the grafts of CVB4-infected mice (Fig. 2None). 3None). Histopathological changes were quantified by blinded scoring of sections from all available animals (Fig. B: Immunohistochemical staining for insulin: ?50% of the graft is positive for insulin in the CVB4-infected mouse (right panel) compared with greater than 75% in the control mouse (left panel). C: Immunohistochemical staining for glucagon: ?75% of the graft is positive for glucagon in the CVB4-infected mouse (right panel) compared with ?50% in the control mouse (left panel). B: Replicating virus is present in serum from CVB4-infected mice at the time of takedown. C: Viral nucleic acid, quantified by NanoString, is present in the grafts of CVB4-infected animals at the time of takedown. D: VP1 is present within the grafts of CVB4-infected animals. E: VP1 is present in insulin-producing cells in grafts of CVB4-infected mice. VP1 is absent from the graft of a mock-infected control mouse (top panel). 3None). Plaques were recovered from terminal serum of CVB4-infected animals, indicating the presence of replication-competent virus (Fig. 3None). Viral RNA was readily detected by NanoString from the terminal human graft samples (Fig. 3None). To establish that human beta-cells were infected with CVB4, coimmunofluorescence staining was performed on human islet graft sections using antibodies against insulin, glucagon, and enterovirus viral protein 1 (VP1). VP1 was readily detected in all graft samples from CVB4-infected mice at various time points; examples from 41 and 49 dpi (Fig. Notably, VP1 and insulin colocalized frequently, indicating that beta-cells were infected with CVB4. VP1 is not present in the graft of the mock-infected mouse but is readily detected within the human islet graft of the CVB4-infected mouse (right panels). INSgene expression was significantly lower in grafts from CVB4-infected mice compared with those from the mock-infected controls (Fig. Again, significant changes in gene expression were observed in CVB4-infected samples compared with those from controls. 