GE has been shown to be increased in obese children (14) and differs by ethnicity in the pediatric age group (15). Measurements were repeated three times, and average values were used. A baseline sample was obtained for measurement of glucose and insulin levels. Sex distribution was characterized by more males in the severely obese group. Upon evaluation of oGE as a dependent variable in a linear regression with age, sex, ethnicity, weight category, glucose tolerance, and oDI as independent variables, the degree of obesity remained a significant predictor of oGE (P less than 0.001, for each degree of obesity compared with the others). Thus, while controlling for potential confounders, low oDI and low oGE values were independently and synergistically associated with higher 2-h glucose levels on the OGTT results. Among the NGT participants, African Americans had significantly lower oGE values compared with their Caucasian and Hispanic counterparts (P= 0.002 andP less than 0.001, respectively), while no such differences were observed within the IFG/IGT group. Relation of anthropometric changes with GE dynamics. The increasing degree of obesity in childhood is associated with lower oGE values. Indeed, reduced GE has been shown to contribute to the development of hyperglycemia in patients with T2DM (32). We also show that baseline values and dynamics of the oGE are significant independent predictors of changes in 2-h glucose levels over time, highlighting the role of this factor in the development of altered glucose metabolism. We show that increased obesity is associated with reduced oGE values. Second, the insulin dose used in IVGTT studies has been shown to be inversely correlated with insulin sensitivity derived from the study (38). Third, we used the Matsuda index as a surrogate of whole-body insulin sensitivity and included it in calculations of the oDI. Despite its limitations and high dependency on insulin dynamics during the OGTT, it has been shown to be useful as a surrogate of insulin sensitivity and as part of the oDI calculation (26). The discrepancy in insulin secretion profiles between these studies implicates that an optimal correlation between the indices of GE should not be expected. The ability of this novel surrogate to predict the development of T2DM in this population in combination with other clinical and metabolic parameters may help to identify obese children and adolescents who are at the greatest risk for the disease. 