Patients were randomized either to the group that received bedtime supplemental aspart insulin (supplement) to correct BG levels greater than 7.8 mmol/L (140 mg/dL) or to the group that did not receive bedtime supplemental insulin (no-supplement) except for severe hyperglycemia (BG greater than 19.4 mmol/L [350 mg/dL]). Specifically, fasting BGs were defined as POC BG before breakfast. The primary end point was to assess for differences in mean fasting BG concentration between groups. In the no-supplement group, we also compared differences in fasting and 3:00a.m.BG levels between patients who received bedtime supplemental insulin and those who did not. Table 1shows the baseline characteristics of patients in both treatment groups. Mean fasting daily BG levels also did not differ during the study between groups (Fig. No difference was found between the group that received bedtime insulin supplementation (?) As expected, significantly more patients in the supplement group received bedtime supplemental insulin than those in the no-supplement group (P less than 0.001) (Table 2). As expected, each evening, significantly more patients in the supplement group received supplemental insulin than in the no-supplement group (Supplementary Fig. In the intention-to-treat analysis, hypoglycemia (BG less than 3.9 mmol/L [70 mg/dL]) occurred in 30% of patients in the supplement group and 26% of patients in the no-supplement group (Table 2). Severe hypoglycemia (BG less than 2.2 mmol/L [40 mg/dL]) was uncommon and reported in one patient in the no-supplement group and in none of the patients in the supplement group. There were no differences in hypoglycemic events at 3:00a.m.and fasting between the groups (Table 2). In particular, there were no differences in hypoglycemia in the supplement and no-supplement group after receiving bedtime insulin supplementation (P= 0.55). In the subset analyses where bedtime BG levels were stratified by 5.5 mmol/L (100 mg/dL) intervals starting at greater than 7.8 mmol/L (140 mg/dL), there were no differences in glycemic control, hypoglycemia rates, or insulin dose requirements between the supplement and no-supplement groups (data not shown). In the current study, the total daily supplemental insulin dose in patients with hyperglycemia was 6 +/- 3 units/day with ?2 units at bedtime. Because there were no differences in any of the glycemic outcomes, it is likely that such small amounts of insulin supplementation at bedtime did not influence glucose control or clinical outcomes. 