However, with unresectable disease, other types of therapy are usually needed, such as anti-hypertensive treatment with pharmacologic agents or inhibitors of catecholamine excess and radiotherapy to palliate painful bone metastases or radiometabolic treatment[None]. Previous studies have demonstrated, by measuring urinary catecholamine and metanephrine levels or RECIST (Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors) criteria, that combination chemotherapy can be effective for advanced malignant pheochromocytomas[None]. Imaging with radiolabeled MIBG is able to detect adrenal and extra-adrenal tumor masses, such as pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma; in particular, tumor lesions that concentrate MIBG can be benign or malignant and the ability to detect tumors on MIBG scans depends on both tumor size and differentiation[None]. We previously demonstrated that qualitative analysis using MIBG imaging allows lesion-by-lesion evaluation of the heterogeneity of neuroblastoma response to chemotherapy[None]. The aim of this study was to investigate the usefulness of molecular imaging with MIBG for evaluating the effects of combination chemotherapy on individual tumor lesions by monitoring MIBG uptake changes after treatment in patients with malignant pheochromocytoma. This summed value represented the total abnormal MIBG uptake and was used to compare pre- and post-chemotherapy MIBG scans in each patient. [None]demonstrated that FDG-PET is a useful method for evaluating the effect of [131I]MIBG therapy in patients with malignant pheochromocytoma. Although we previously demonstrated that MIBG imaging might be useful in monitoring the response to chemotherapy in patients with neuroblastoma[None], no studies have been performed to assess chemotherapy efficacy in patients with malignant pheochromocytoma by MIBG or PET imaging. In the present study, we propose that serial MIBG imaging can be useful in monitoring patients with malignant pheochromocytoma who are receiving chemotherapy. In particular, this patient had 37 sites of disease identified by MIBG imaging; after 4.1 months of chemotherapy, MIBG uptake decreased in 13 lesions and disappeared in another 12. The results of the present study show that successful combination chemotherapy of malignant pheochromocytoma leads to a reduction in catecholamine production and MIBG uptake by these tumors. 