The functional experiments demonstrated that the truncating mutations code for hyper-stable WIP1 protein, which induces strong dephosphorylation of Ser15 of p53 and impairs the p53-dependent G1 checkpoint (KleiblovaNone, 2013). The presence of mutantPPM1Din normal cells of cancer patients suggests that the mutations were transmitted in germline and contributed to carcinogenesis. However, a paper published earlier demonstrated that the truncating mutations ofPPM1Dfound in blood cells of breast or ovarian cancer patients may result from sequence alterations formed during individual development as a mosaic mutations. Similar mutations ofPPM1Dwere also found by others in leukocytes of ovarian cancer patients (AkbariNone, 2014). We decided to find out whether truncating mutations ofPPM1Dare present in blood DNA samples from lung cancer patients. The PCR products were prepared for sequencing by treatment with exonuclease I and shrimp alkaline phosphatase (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA, USA). The sequencing products were analysed on GA3500 genetic analyzer (Applied Biosystems-Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA). For selected DNA samples with mutations, the PCR products were cloned using CloneJet PCR cloning kit (Fermentas-Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The PCR product was cloned into pJET1.2/blunt using CloneJET PCR cloning kit (Fermentas-Thermo Fisher Scientific). The wild-type p53 was expressed from pC53-SN3 plasmid, which was a gift from Dr. Bert Vogelstein and Dr. Kenneth W. Kinzler from Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA (BakerNone, 1990). Unexpectedly, the major differences in the phosphorylation status of p53 Ser15 did not influence the ability of ectopic p53 to activate the expression of endogenous targets of p53-the genes coding for p21 or MDM2 proteins (Figure 3). Thus, the observations made using different experimental settings suggest that very strong expression of mutant WIP1, which clearly has the ability to diminish p53 phosphorylation on Ser15, does not measurably influence the ability of p53 to regulate the expression of its target genes. Moreover, the truncating mutations detected by us were not reported in three papers onPPM1Dalterations found in blood cells of breast, ovarian or colorectal cancer patients (KleiblovaNone, 2013,RuarkNone, 2013;AkbariNone, 2014). Another study reported 1.5% of ovarian cancer cases with truncating mutations ofPPM1D(AkbariNone, 2014). ThePPM1Dtruncating mutations arising somatically were recently found in brainstem gliomas (ZhangNone, 2014). Our approach is apparently suitable for detection of the influence of WIP1 on the phosphorylation status of ectopic p53, but the amount of ectopic p53 may be too high for detection of the modulating effect of Ser15 phosphorylation on the ability of p53 to regulate the expression of target genes. WIP1 can dephosphorylate other proteins, including components of the base excision repair, what is associated with decreased activity of this DNA repair system (LuNone, 2004). 