It is well established that murine NK cells can be subdivided according to the expression of the cell surface molecules CD27 and CD11b. Our data reveal that transfer of IL-2 expanded CD11b+NK cells delayed onset and reduced severity of acute GVHD in comparison to untreated GVHD controls or mice receiving IL-2 expanded CD27+NK cells, displaying a significantly reduced GVHD score as compared to the control group receiving BM and alloreactive T cells (BM+T; *p less than 0.05 on day 28) (None). In contrast, all mice additionally receiving alloreactive T cells (BM + T), a portion of which further received IL-2 expanded CD27+or CD11b+NK cells (as defined above), were protected from leukemia by a strong GVL effect (None). In the above panels (AandB) days after bone marrow transplant (BMT) and BCL1 injection are indicated along the top of the panels and 3 representative animals per group are depicted over time. (C) Average photons emitted from luc+BCL1 cells observed from ventral or lateral positioned imaging; n = 3 animals per group; Error bars represent SD. In mice that received allogeneic BMT and were treated with alloreactive T cells +/- the subset of IL-2 expanded CD27+NK cells, we also observed severe GVHD in addition to the GVL effects. In contrast and of particular importance, mice treated with IL-2 expanded CD11b+NK cells showed efficient GVL response (None) accompanied by a significantly reduced GVHD and improved survival. To determine whether the favorable effect of the CD11b+NK cells in GVL and GVHD is predicted by specific genomic properties, we performed microarray analysis of the four major NK cell subsets that can be phenotypically distinguished by expression of the surface markers c-Kit, CD27 and CD11b (None). Further gene ontology (GO) analysis indicated important functional differences between NK cell subsets regarding their cytotoxic potential and the expression of chemokine receptors (NoneandNone). Mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) of chemokine receptors CCR7, CXCR3, and CCR2 on the surface of the different NK cell subsets correspond to their gene expression data, and CCR9 showed an even higher MFI on the CD11b+NK cell subset (None). (B) Gene profiling of the four pre-dominant NK cell subsets. In sum, microarray analysis revealed important differences in gene expression patterns between the CD27 or CD11b expressing NK cell subsets pointing to specific functional properties concerning their cytotoxic potential and migratory behavior. Due to the intrinsic differences in the chemokine receptor repertoire (None) we next sought to investigate whether the four NK cell subsets might vary in their migratory profile. Furthermore, upon adoptive transfer of the four cell-sorted NK subsets from congenic mice based on their phenotypes as described above, we were able to monitor their distinct migratory behavior following BMT. Remarkably, in mice developing GVHD following allogeneic BMT plus T cell transfer, a failure in immune reconstitution with significantly reduced numbers of NK cells, specifically mature CD11b+NK cells, could be observed (Fig. As described above, the adoptive transfer of IL-2 expanded CD11b+NK cells delayed the onset and reduced the severity of acute GVHD, but preserved GVL (NoneandNone). We furthermore aimed to address the antitumor capacity of specifically the IL-2 expanded CD11b+NK cells against the allogeneic luc+BCL1 leukemia cell line. As BCL1 leukemia cells do not growin vitro, we performed the cytotoxicity assays directlyin vivoin the setting of allogeneic BMT, but transferred only 1*106CD11b+NK cells without alloreactive T cells. Days after BMT and BCL1 injection are indicated along the top of the panels and 3 representative animals per group are depicted over time. (D) Average photons emitted from luc+BCL1 cells observed from ventral or lateral positioned imaging; n = 3 animals per group; error bars represent SD. Next, we asked if the mechanism by which NK cells inhibit GVHD,Nonecould also be attributed to the cytotoxic capacity of the subset of CD11b+NK cells. NoneIt has been suggested that the different NK subsets correspond to distinct differentiation steps from initially CD27+NK cells acquiring CD11b as a marker of mature NK cells. Of note, while the adoptive transfer of CD11b+NK cells delayed the onset and reduced the severity of acute GVHD, we observed support of the GVL reaction as assessed byin vivoBLI experiments addressing the expansion of luc+BCL1 leukemic cells in the setting of allogeneic BMT with or without induction of GVHD (NoneandNone). In summary, the specific subset of CD11b+NK cells provides the best migratory capability to peripheral GVHD target organs, most efficient inhibition of DC mediated T-cell proliferation and protection against acute GVHD concurrently with GVL support. 