Elevated fasting levels of nonesterified fatty acids (NEFAs) may represent an early type 2 diabetes risk marker, but few large prospective studies have examined whether they predict future disease incidence. Functionally, NEFAs serve as a key energy source for skeletal muscle and myocardium as well as other major organs, but chronically high levels indicate metabolic dysfunction and have been associated with obesity and risk of type 2 diabetes (4-8), though the null finding has also been reported (9). Overall, serum NEFA concentrations may not only serve as a marker of type 2 diabetes, but also promote its development. The primary aim of MESA is to investigate clinical and subclinical coronary heart disease development and progression. Though its interaction with n-3 FAs was previously unrecognized, the association of NEFAs with metabolic dysfunction and/or type 2 diabetes has been examined in a number of previous studies. A subsequent longitudinal study in the Paris Prospective cohort reported that higher fasting plasma NEFA concentrations conveyed a 30% higher risk for deterioration of glucose tolerance over a 2-year period (6). A subsequent study in the same cohort was conducted in 2012 and showed that elevated NEFAs were associated with an approximate threefold increase in risk of type 2 diabetes or impaired fasting glucose over a 5-8-year period (7). However, there is also compelling evidence to suggest that elevated NEFA levels directly contribute to type 2 diabetes pathogenesis. Despite the relatively few prospective studies of NEFAs and type 2 diabetes, experimental studies in cell culture, animal models, and humans have shown that NEFAs activate pathways known to promote disease development. Specifically, it has been demonstrated that elevated NEFAs increase lipid mediators such as diacylglycerol and ceramide (33-36) and induce inflammation (13-15), all of which may disrupt peripheral insulin-mediated signaling (13-18,36). It is the first prospective study with a large multiethnic cohort showing that n-3 FAs modify the association between NEFAs and risk of incident type 2 diabetes. In terms of limitations, NEFA levels have been reported to be highly variable, even in fasting subjects (40). NEFA measurement may represent a tool for assessing type 2 diabetes risk independent of other risk factors including adiposity and inflammation. Further studies are warranted to establish NEFA ranges that identify moderate- and high-risk reference ranges for type 2 diabetes. 