Diffusion-weighted (DW)-MRI is a functional imaging technique that is now widely used as a standard imaging sequence, together with unenhanced T1/T2 weighted imaging and contrast-enhanced imaging for liver evaluation. As a non-contrast-enhanced technique, DW-MRI is particularly useful in patients with severe renal dysfunction at risk of developing nephrogenic systemic fibrosis (NSF) after administration of gadolinium-based contrast medium[None]. In general, the quality of liver DW-MRI seems to be more consistent at 1.5 T compared with 3.0 T, although many institutions are now adopting the 3.0 T imaging platform for liver imaging because of the high-quality T1-weighted dynamic contrast-enhanced imaging that can be achieved at the higher field strength. In 2 studies, decrease in hepatic perfusion was cited as a reason because decreased liver perfusion fraction was observed in the cirrhotic liver, measured using multiplebvalue DW-MRI and analysed using the principles of intravoxel incoherent motion (IVIM)[None,None]. [None]assessed hepatic entropy ADC values in addition to mean ADC values in patients with chronic hepatitis C. The entropy ADC provides information related to variation in the volume histogram of ADC and has previously been applied in the neurologic system[None,None]. From these studies, the mean ADC values measured on DW-MRI seem to have a limited range to distinguish early stages of fibrosis (e.g. However, an earlier study found no correlation between ADC values and hepatic fat fraction, although MR spectroscopy and dual-echo chemical shift imaging in the same population showed good correlation with hepatic fat fraction[None]. Application of a small diffusion weighting (b less than 50-150 s mm-2) nulls the intrahepatic vascular signal resulting in black-blood images that improve the detection of focal liver lesions while maintaining a high SNR (Fig. The use of higherbvalues ( greater than 500 s mm-2) facilitates liver lesion characterization, helping to distinguish between cystic and solid lesions[None,None]. However, differentiation between different solid lesions is difficult based on visual assessment because these lesions, whether benign or malignant, demonstrate impeded diffusion on the highbvalue images. Improvement in lesion detection with DW-MRI can be explained by improved lesion to background image contrast using lowbvalue (or black-blood) images, which helps to differentiate small metastases from intrahepatic vasculature[None]. These studies (Table 3) demonstrated that DW-MRI has a high sensitivity and specificity for the detection of liver metastases[None,None]. When DW-MRI was performed after the administration of superparamagnetic iron oxide contrast medium, lesion detection was also improved by suppression of background liver signal[None]. Of the benign solid lesions, hepatic haemangiomas have the highest ADC value, typically higher than the adjacent liver parenchyma, which can be ascribed to the T2 shine-through effect (Fig. Consensus recommendations suggest that the omission ofb = 0 and calculation using a range of higher and lowerbvalues[None]may be practical to avoid measurement uncertainty that may arise from variations in the flow-sensitive components of the diffusion measurements. Quantitative ADC measurements can be used to aid focal liver lesion characterization, but it may be difficult to confidently describe a lesion as benign or malignant based on ADC values alone, due to the considerable overlap between groups of hepatic pathologies. Studies have shown that effective tumour treatment can result in an increase in ADC value long before measureable changes in lesion size are detected[None], and as early as 1-4 weeks from the start of therapy. In patients with colorectal hepatic metastases, mean lesional ADC values have been shown to increase in response to chemotherapy in those patients showing at least a partial response[None,None], reflecting a reduction in tissue cellular density and barriers to water movement. Several studies have evaluated the response of primary HCC to chemo- or radioembolization and have demonstrated ADC differences between viable and necrotic portions of the tumour and measureable changes with treatment[None]. High pre-treatment ADC values in colorectal hepatic metastases have been shown to predict a poor response to chemotherapy[None,None], a finding that is in agreement with studies on primary rectal tumours[None]. For example, studies have shown that using IVIM analysis, cirrhotic liver shows a lower perfusion fraction and pseudodiffusion coefficient. Although DW-MRI has been used for the evaluation of liver fibrosis, the sensitivity of the technique to early fibrosis appears limited, and more research is needed to optimize the measurement reproducibility of quantitative parameters derived by IVIM analysis before they can be robustly and meaningfully deployed in the clinical arena. 