These changes are consistent with our previously published observation that liver ferritin protein levels increase in H diets (21). G6Pase peak levels trended higher in the LN compared with the H group (Fig. 2NoneandNone). Dietary iron affects the formation of the Rev-Erbalpha repressor complex and its activity. Western blot of Rev-Erbalpha IP extracts blotted for NCOR and Rev-Erbalpha at ZT14 (A) and quantification of these blots (n= 6) (B). 2NoneandNone). Conversely, at ZT0, heme levels were highest in the LN-fed mice (Supplementary Fig. 4NoneandNone). When mice were fed high dietary heme, we also saw similar results in PTT, gluconeogenic enzyme transcripts, and heme levels (Supplementary Fig. 4NoneandNone). 4NoneandNone). Drug-induced increase of heme ablates variations in heme, Rev-Erbalpha/NCOR complex formation, and gluconeogenesis observed among the various diets. Western blot of Rev-Erbalpha IP extracts blotted for NCOR and Rev-Erbalpha (E) and quantification of the density of the NCOR blot normalized to the Rev-Erbalpha density (n = 4-6) (F). Western blot for Rev-Erbalpha/NCOR coimmunoprecipitation extracts blotted for Rev-Erbalpha and NCOR (n= 6) (K) and quantified density of NCOR bands normalized to Rev-Erbalpha density (n= 6) (L). Similar effects were noted for PEPCK and G6Pase transcript levels (Fig. 4NoneandNone). 4NoneandNone). ALA treatment brings PEPCK and G6Pase transcript levels down in non-iron-treated cells, close to those observed in the FAC-treated cells (Fig. Western blot of Rev-Erbalpha IP cell extract blotted for NCOR and Rev-Erbalpha (C) and quantification of the density of the NCOR band as normalized to Rev-Erbalpha (n= 3) (D). PGC-1alpha regulates ALAS1 transcription (25), leading us to explore its possible regulation by iron to explain the differences in heme synthesis among the iron diets. In mice, both PGC-1alpha transcript and protein levels increased with increasing dietary iron (Fig. In HepG2 cells, partial silencing of PGC-1alpha by siRNA treatment (Fig. Dietary iron alters the oxidative state of the cell to increase the transcription of PGC-1alpha, which then regulates heme synthesis. The changes in heme levels observed with increased dietary iron are not due to limiting amounts of iron for metalation of heme but rather by the regulation of heme synthesis by ALAS1. Furthermore, mice on the lower levels of dietary iron show no evidence of systemic iron deficiency (Table 1). The regulation of ALAS1 is not mediated directly by iron responsive proteins, as it is for the erythroid form of the enzyme ALAS2 (34). Rather, iron drives increased PGC-1alpha expression that in turn transcriptionally activates ALAS1. We demonstrate that iron regulation of PGC-1alpha occurs at least in part through oxidant-sensing pathways. Treatment of mice with the antioxidant NAC eliminated the variation seen in PGC-1alpha, ALAS1, PEPCK, and G6Pase among the different iron diets. Furthermore, in previous studies, we have shown that iron alters FOXO1-dependent transcription and levels of the FOXO1 acetylation (4). 