Three of the five panels in the strip are shown. Others were clearly predicted in his writings (3). Those noteworthy discoveries (Fig. Thus, the new availability of relevant tissues from patients with T1D and control subjects, such as those emanating from the Network for Pancreatic Organ Donors with Diabetes (nPOD) (15), should foster research aimed at not only confirming old hypotheses but also testing new ideas. Studies in animal models suggest that insulin deficiency affects the survival of acinar cells and the synthesis of certain pancreatic enzymes (19). First, there is a common belief that the insulitis lesion is a relatively widespread if not universal feature of the disease. A second feature subject to misunderstanding pertains to both the quantitative and qualitative features of insulitis. In terms of the quantity of inflammatory cells, historically, no universally recognized definition of insulitis existed. Pathological examinations would suggest that clinical presentation occurs when approximately two-thirds of the islets are insulin deficient, but the range is quite variable (30). Indeed, the degree of beta-cell loss at symptomatic onset appears dependent on a number of factors (e.g., age, degree of beta-cell dysfunction, insulin resistance), consistent with previous discussions on differences between the pancreata of those diagnosed with T1D less than or greater than 15 years of age (27). Reproduced from Atkinson et al. In support of this concept, a decline in exocrine function, as measured by stool chymotrypsin and elastase, has been noted (37). In studies of pancreatic development in both humans and rodents, it appears that a wave of beta-cell death occurs as a normal physiological process following birth (38). This may express itself physiologically as the cause of hyperinsulinemia noted to occur in early infants (39). Indeed, histological examinations of rodent pancreata assessing the frequency of dying cells suggest that up to one-third of beta-cells turn over during this early period of development (40). Hence, given that beta-cell replication after the age of 10 years appears rare (44), the number of these cells is likely "fixed." These explanations were developed based on concepts that the weaning period represents a developmental stage marked by a pronounced change of metabolic processes as well as hormone production (45). Taken collectively, these findings support a hypothesis that immune and perhaps nonautoimmune mechanisms (e.g., developmental, environmental, genetic) influence a loss of beta-cell mass as well as loss of pancreatic mass in T1D, possibly even before full-blown disease, thus forming clear objectives for future studies. 5), a concept has arisen that within a modest time of disease onset, individuals have an absolute loss of C-peptide production alongside of an absence of pancreatic beta-cells. Moving forward, these studies support additional research efforts designed to understand the factors (e.g., age at onset, genetics, treatment) that influence beta-cell persistence, as such information could prove vital for the development of therapeutic interventions designed to preserve beta-cell function. Male predominance is a further, unexplained feature of T1D in young adults (reviewed in50). Why does so much of T1D research focus on initiation and precipitation of disease instead of the fact that the intervening period may last for decades? 