The distinct characteristics of these isolated oligomeric states can then be extracted by exploiting the light-absorbing property of PR, which permits optical absorption spectroscopy to read out functional attributes. colimembranes establishes that an oligomeric form of PR is present in the bilayer. NoneIn order to prevent the possibility of this and directly observe oligomeric forms of PR inE. With the aim to capture oligomers of PR present within the bacterial membrane, membranes extracted from PR-expressingE. As would be expected, the oligomeric structure is maintained upon purification of crosslinked PR in surfactant micelles (Figure 1, lanes D and F). By varying the surfactant used during purification and SEC, we were able to investigate the effect of surfactant on oligomer formation and its potential functional consequences. The choice to compare DPC- and DDM-reconstituted PR also allows us to examine how micelle geometry (size and shape) influences oligomer packing within proteo-micelles. In any case, its quantity varies for different protein preparations, but is most easily isolated with DPC. The primary method chosen to characterize the functionality of PR in different oligomeric states within surfactants was to observe the pH-dependence of the optical absorption spectrum. NoneCrucially for this study, the E108Q mutation does not alter the distribution of oligomers isolated by SEC (Figure 2) or the trends of the pH-dependent absorption behavior of the PR monomer or oligomer (SI, Figure S4). In fact, the apparent loss of dipolar broadening indicates that the distance between adjacent A-B loop 55 residues is greater than 20 A when oligomeric PR is reconstituted in a DPC micelle. It is insightful that these properties, including the D97 pKa and photocycle kinetics, are upheld in either the DPC or the DDM micelle environment (Figures 2and3), while the packing of PR in the oligomers significantly vary (Figure 6A). colimembrane verified by SDS-PAGE and crosslinking represents the first finding suggesting a propensity of PR to make homo-oligomeric contacts in a bacterial lipid bilayer environment (Figure 1). colilipid composition differs from the native organism, which could affect oligomerization. Upon isolation of the oligomeric and monomeric species within micelles for characterization, it becomes clear that surfactant properties affect the distribution of oligomers (Figure 2). This is epitomized by the dramatic (1 pH point) shift for the pH-dependent protonation transition of the interior D97 residue upon removing the interaction mediated by oligomerization (Figure 3). Finally, our observation of a distinct pKa shift of D97 upon oligomerization of PR suggests the potential for altered activity at the pH of the native ocean environment (~8.2) based on oligomeric contacts. The pKa differences observed would mean that protonation of the key "proton acceptor" residue (D97) is altered from greater than 90% in the oligomer to ~50% for the monomer, suggesting that the population of PR with a particular internal state is dramatically changed by intra-oligomer contacts. The qualitative observation of preserved yet slowed M state-related conformational change for oligomeric PR is also corroborated by EPR measurements (Figure 5), where an E-F loop side chain experiences decreased mobility upon light-activation but decays back to equilibrium more slowly when in a oligomeric form. If we were to attribute the prominent pKa modulation upon PR oligomerization observed here (Figure 3) to a specific interaction, it would be the cross-protomer interaction between residues W34 and H75 of an adjacent PR revealed by the crystal structure (a strong hydrogen bond of less than 3 A). This was observed by a prominent (1 full pH point) decrease in pKa of a functionally important internal residue of PR (D97) (Figure 3) and a fivefold slower M state decay for the oligomeric vs. the monomeric state of PR in surfactant micelles (Figures 4and5). The molecular-level detail regarding the PR oligomer-micelle complex obtained by EPR reveals that the packing of molecules within a given surfactant environment can be altered (Figure 6) with negligible functional consequences. 