Elucidating the coordination chemistry of both mammalian and microbial proteins involved in the sequestration, recruitment, and utilization of these metals provides a molecular foundation for physiology and informs therapeutic development. NoneIn this context, members of the S100 family of Ca(II)-binding proteins have emerged as contributors to transition-metal-ion homeostasis and players in innate immunity. NoneCP is therefore an abundant and important component of the innate immune response and a significant focus of recent work on Mn(II) homeostasis at the host-pathogen interface as described below. Copper ions are shown as teal spheres. No structure of the Zn(II)-bound form of CP has been reported. None(E) Site 2 of theB. None(F) The hammerhead ribozyme. Thus, it is surprising that CP exclusively utilizes neutral His ligands to coordinate Mn(II). None,NoneAdditional structural and spectroscopic investigations are required to elucidate how the CP scaffold and His6site are tuned to capture Mn(II). Studies of CP mutant proteins and numerous bacterial strains revealed that site 2 contributes toin vitrogrowth inhibitory activity more than site 1. NoneThe mechanisms of Mn(II) acquisition by microbes as well as the microbial processes and virulence factors that require Mn(II) are of particular interest (Figure3). aureusand Mn(II)-dependent processes that CP may disrupt. CP released into the extracellular space coordinates Mn(II) at sites of infection and competes with the staphylococcal Mn(II) transporters MntC and MntH. pneumoniaeand MntABC ofS. aureus(MntC) have informed the mechanism of bacterial Mn(II) capture. The metal ions are omitted from the overlay. (E) An expansion of the Mn(II)-binding site. NoneDespite the significance ofS. Furthermore, redundancy of Mn(II)-uptake systems may be necessary forS. aureusto acquire sufficient quantities of Mn(II) at sites of infection where CP is abundant. aureusNewman with CPin vitroreduces the total SOD activity of whole-cell lysates. NoneThis effect was not observed upon mutation of sites 1 and 2 of CP, indicating that the transition metal-ion binding sites are necessary. NoneSubsequent studies revealed that site 2 (His6) was required to attenuate the SOD activity ofS. Thus, although Mn(II) chelation is a bacteriostatic effect, CP may assist the bactericidal oxidative burst by reducing SOD activity. The Lyme disease pathogenB. sanguinisclass Ib RNR can be reconstituted with a diiron or dimanganese cofactor. NoneMoreover, mutation of the class III RNR (DeltanrdD) had no effect on heart valve colonization. The effect of CP on cofactor assembly and the activity of class Ib RNR remains an avenue for future work. colilactonase UlaG, are active with added Mn(II). Manganese and CP are two intriguing players in this arena, and CP is currently the only known Mn(II)-sequestering host-defense protein in mammals. In recent years, chemical and biological initiatives have addressed the Mn(II)-binding properties of human CP as well as how CP affects select Mn(II)-dependent microbial processes and contributes to microbial infection. Many different species of metal-bound CP exist, and the M(II)-CP speciation will be dependent on the metal-ion availability in any physiological environment. How CP modulates the ratios of bioavailable metal ionsin vivo, and how microbes as well as the host respond to these changing nutrient levels, warrants rigorous evaluation. 