Most recently, we reported thatKlothomRNA and proteins are expressed in mouse pancreatic islets and that silencing of Klotho impaired glucose-stimulated insulin secretion in MIN6 beta-cells (11). One-fourth of the pancreas was used for Western blot analysis of Klotho protein expression. We performed IHC staining of Klotho and insulin in human pancreas. 1NoneandNone). Klotho protein expression was significantly decreased in pancreas in patients with T2DM (Fig. E: Semiquantification of Klotho and insulin staining in mouse pancreatic islets. The IHC analysis showed a significant decrease in Klotho protein expression in pancreatic islets indb/dbmice (Fig. Western blot analysis indicated that Klotho protein expression levels were significantly decreased in pancreas ofdb/dbmice (20 weeks) versus age-matched lean mice (Fig. The rAAV-mKL did not alter blood glucose levels significantly in lean mice (Fig. 2NoneandNone). 2NoneandNone). 2NoneandNone). beta-Cell-specific delivery of mKL did not affect the body weights significantly in either lean ordb/dbmice (Supplementary Fig. At 6 weeks after gene delivery, we first examined GFP and FLAG-tag protein expression in cross sections of paraffin-embedded pancreatic islets, livers, and kidneys through IHC analysis. 3NoneandNone). We next studied Klotho expression in pancreatic islets in diabetic mice. Klotho staining in pancreatic islets of Langerhans in controldb/dbmice was significantly decreased compared with that of control lean mice (Fig. 3NoneandNone). The treatments with rAAV-mKL increased Klotho staining in pancreatic islets of both lean anddb/dbmice (Fig. 3NoneandNone). 3NoneandNone). 3NoneandNone). In addition, the number of insulin-positive cells in pancreatic islets of Langerhans indb/dbmice was significantly less than that of lean mice (Fig. The number of 4-HNE-positive cells and the intracellular superoxide level were significantly increased in pancreatic islets ofdb/dbmice (Fig. In vivo expression of mouse Klotho attenuated the oxidative stress levels in pancreatic islets ofdb/dbmice (Fig. 4NoneandNone). B: The percentage of 4-HNE-positive cells in pancreatic islets. F: Semiquantification of Pdx-1 staining in pancreatic islets. The number of DNAJC3-positive cells in the pancreatic islets was significantly increased indb/dbmice versus lean mice. B: The percentage of DNAJC3-positive-staining cells in pancreatic islets. The number of apoptotic cells was increased in islets ofdb/dbmice, which can be dampened by expression of Klotho (Fig. Thus, rAAV-mKL treatments attenuated apoptosis in pancreatic islets ofdb/dbmice (Fig. B: The percentage of PCNA-positive cells in pancreatic islets. We further assessed the effects of recombinant short-form Klotho (65 kDa) and full-length Klotho (130 kDa) protein on beta-cell function in the beta-islets isolated from lean mice. We found that only short-form Klotho promoted insulin secretion in beta-islets (Supplementary Fig. The full-length Klotho did not have obvious effects on insulin secretion in beta-islets (Supplementary Fig. The depleted Klotho protein expression was associated with decreased insulin storage in pancreatic islets (Fig. beta-Cell-specific expression of Klotho improved or preserved beta-cell function (Figs. 3NoneandNone). Because a study of the mechanistic link of Klotho and superoxide generation may be compromised in the in vivo animal experiment, we investigated how Klotho attenuates high glucose-induced superoxide production in MIN6 beta-cells. Of note, Klotho attenuates high glucose-induced upregulation of NADPH oxidase activity and superoxide production without alteration of glucose levels, suggesting that Klotho has a direct protective effect in beta-cells. On the other hand, in the animal study, the beneficial effects of overexpression of Klotho in beta-cells may also be partially attributed to the euglycemic effect of Klotho due to increased insulin secretion. Collectively, these data indicate that beta-cell-specific expression of Klotho may preserve beta-cells partially by suppressing superoxide production and oxidative stress in pancreatic beta-islets in T2DM. However, the 65-kDa Klotho seems to be the functional protein because treatment with 65-kDa, not 130-kDa, Klotho protein promoted glucose-induced insulin secretion (Supplementary Fig. 