Also, patient psychosocial factors, such as diabetes distress, social distress, and depression, that impact patient engagement and treatment adherence are not systematically managed as part of routine medical care in T2D (6,7). Patients were identified from a clinic diabetes registry and using referrals from an ophthalmology practice affiliated with the participating clinics. The initial visit was an hour long, and the remaining visits were a half hour long each. 1) to structure each education visit and to share information collected during each visit with each other and with clinic providers. 2) generated after each intervention visit that is emailed to the provider to support clinical decision making and includes recommendations for changes in medication management for hyperglycemia, hypertension, and dyslipidemia. The diabetes nurse and diabetes dietitian interventionists created clinical care recommendations for providers on pharmacological management of abnormal blood glucose, blood pressure (BP), and lipid levels (e.g.,Supplementary Fig. Presence of these symptoms triggered a notification to the provider, covering physician, or clinical nurse for action. Training for the diabetes interventionist team included training in the use of the dashboard as well as a diabetes medication treatment protocol provided for the management of blood glucose, BP, and blood lipid medications in T2D based on national guidelines (19). This program was designed as part of the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation Diabetes Initiative to advance the delivery of culturally sensitive care for patients with T2D in primary care (23,24). Patients also had access to lifestyle and diabetes self-management support groups run at the clinics by peer volunteers and clinical staff. IC patients completed an average of 3.8 +/- 1.5 visits with the study interventionists. In the IC group, 34.7% of patients reported having hypoglycemia symptoms in the prior month to baseline. In the UDC group, 38% of patients reported hypoglycemia symptoms at baseline, and only 44.7% of those patients reported symptoms at follow-up. There were also no differences between the two conditions in new reports of hypoglycemia at follow-up (22 vs. 20.6%, no significance). This clinical trial conducted at two affiliated urban safety net clinics focused on Latino T2D patients in poor glycemic control and demonstrated the clinical effectiveness of a diabetes care program enriched by use of a diabetes dashboard application to support team care. The UDC control condition consisted of a long-standing comprehensive diabetes care program designed as part of a Robert Wood Johnson Foundation Diabetes Initiative to advance the delivery of culturally sensitive care for patients with T2D (23,24). The diabetes dashboard thus provides a strategy for primary care clinics to meet these new recommendations, with modifications and updates over time, as appropriate. 