HIF-1 is the principle transcription factor involved in the adaptive response to hypoxia. Interestingly, both PHD2 and 3 are highly expressed in the heart [12]. Knocking down the expression of PHD3 significantly increases the capillary density in ischemic hindlimb and improves blood perfusion to the ischemic foot [17]. However, it has been reported that PHD3 itself is a HIF-1 target and can be induced by hypoxia, which may serve as a form of negative feedback mechanism to regulate HIF-1alpha stability at hypoxic condition [10,25]. More importantly, depletion of PHD3 in neonatal mouse ventricular cardiomyocytes further increased HIF-1alpha protein level at hypoxic condition (Figure 4A), suggesting that PHD3 can regulate HIF-1alpha stability at hypoxic condition. Taken together, we demonstrated that depletion of PHD3 further increased the protein level of HIF-1alpha at hypoxic condition and increased expression of HIF-1alpha protected cardiomyocytes from hypoxia-induced apoptosis. It is generally accepted that oxidative stress plays a critical role in cardiomyocyte apoptosis induced by I/R injury [28]. It is very interesting to examine whether PHD3 regulates the DDR and apoptosis induced by oxidative stress in cardiomyocytes. Doxorubicin, a potent chemotherapy agent, causes cardiomyocyte apoptosis and cardiomyopathy[31]. In order to better understand the role of PHD3 in the DDR and apoptosis induced by oxidative stress in cardiomyocytes, we first examined whether PHD3 is involved in the DDR induced by doxorubicin in cardiomyocytes. In addition, DMOG also dramatically inhibited the activation of caspase-3 induced by doxorubicin in HL-1 (Figure 5A). It was recently reported that DDR plays an essential role in cardiomyocyte apoptosis induced by doxorubicin [31]. In addition, doxorubicin-induced apoptosis of NRVM was also significantly inhibited in the presence of DMOG (Figure 7B and C). Finally, hypoxia/re-oxygenation induced a substantial amount of apoptosis of NMVM with wild type PHD3 (Figure 8D and E). As expected, depletion of PHD3 significantly inhibited the apoptosis induced by hypoxia/re-oxygenation (Figure 8D and E). Lack of oxygen will trigger a series of HIF-mediated adaptive responses [33]. Notably, partial depletion of HIF-1alpha completely abolishes the ischemic preconditioning-induced cardioprotection in HIF-1alpha+/-mice [34], suggesting that the abundance of HIF-1alpha protein is a determining factor for its cardioprotective effect. Therefore, it is not surprising that we observed an increased induction of HIF-1alpha protein at hypoxia condition in PHD3 depleted cardiomyocytes. Since our data suggest that overexpression of HIF-1alpha protects cardiomyocytes from apoptosis induced by hypoxia, the increased stabilization of HIF-1alpha may partially contribute to the cardioprotection observed in PHD3 knockout mice. 