The requirement for Scl to repress cardiogenesis in hemogenic tissues was restricted to early midgestation of mouse development, suggesting the presence of epigenetic or other contributing mechanisms that solidify the fate choice. We discovered a distinct subset of Scl-regulated enhancers that are also accessible for cardiac transcription factors in mesoderm, and propose that these enhancers serve as a platform where the fate choice between mutually exclusive fates is determined. The genes in activated/bound group were enriched for GO term hematopoiesis, including key hematopoietic transcription factorsRunx1,Gata2,cMybandCfba2t3/Eto2(Fig1B-D). Scl and control IgG ChIP-seq tracks show examples of Scl binding sites near hematopoietic (Runx1andGata2) and cardiac (Gata4andGata6) genes in Flk1+mesoderm (MES). Verification of Scl-dependent gene expression using qRT-PCR. Scl MES binding sites overlap with experimentally verified heart-specific enhancers upstream ofMyocardinandNkx2.5genes and with hematopoietic enhancers withinRunx1andGata2genes. To assess the epigenetic state of Scl-bound enhancers, 4,393 Scl mesodermal binding sites were assessed for the average levels of histone modifications associated with enhancers (H3K4me1) and active enhancers (H3K4me1 and H3K27ac) (Creyghtonet al,2010; Wamstadet al,2012) during ES cell differentiation to cardiomyocytes. These results show that Scl is not required for the establishment of active enhancer marks in mesoderm, suggesting that these enhancers have become primed for activation in multipotent cardiovascular mesoderm to pave the way for Scl action. Analysis of Scl ChIP-seq tracks for cardiac regulatorsGata4, Nkx2-5andMyocardinverified Scl binding only in Flk1+mesoderm (Fig3C). These data suggest that Scl binding extends from distant enhancers to promoters as hematopoiesis progresses. Examples of developmental stage-specific Scl-bound genes are shown (right). Since Scl was no longer bound to cardiac enhancers in hematopoietic cells, we assessed whether the epigenetic landscape in Scl binding sites was modified upon differentiation of mesoderm to hematopoietic cells. Combinatorial clustering of Scl mesodermal binding sites based on H3K4me1 patterns in mesoderm, hematopoietic progenitors (HPC7) and erythroid cells (MEL) revealed two major clusters. Analysis of Ter119 erythroid cells for several histone marks (ENCODE project and Kowalczyket al,2012) in Scl mesodermal binding sites confirmed a strong correlation between Scl binding and retention of the active histone marks H3K4me1 and H3K27ac in Cluster R, and loss of these marks in Cluster L (Fig4A), also in erythroid cellsin vivo. ChIP-seq tracks around cardiac genesGata4, Gata6andTbx5confirmed the lack of H3K27me3 at Scl binding sites in ES cells, mesoderm and erythroid cells (Fig4B). Comparison of H3K27me3 levels in Scl-bound extended activated and extended repressed genes (see Fig1,Supplementary Table S1DandE) in erythroid cells revealed an increase in H3K27me3 at the TSS of repressed genes, while H3K27ac was more enriched at the TSS of activated genes (Fig4C). Ezh2 ChIP-seq tracks in WT andSclNonemesoderm showing that Ezh2 recruitment to the TSS of cardiac genesGata6,Tbx5andGata4is not Scl dependent. Average Ezh2 enrichment in WT (left) andSclNonemesoderm (right) for inactive enhancers (defined by having H3K4me1 and H3K27me3 modifications (Wamstadet al,2012) and distance greater than 5 kb from TSS) and for Scl binding sites shows no Ezh2 enrichment at Scl binding sites. To investigate whether Scl initiates differential methylation in mesoderm, we performed RRBS (reduced representation bisulfite sequencing) in ES cells, WT andSclNoneFlk1+mesodermal cells, and MEL cells. As the analysis of repressive marks and corepressors provided no evidence for direct Scl-dependent corepressor recruitment to enhancers or promoters in mesoderm, we considered the possibility that Scl inhibits cardiac fate by interfering with the activation of these genes by cardiac regulators. B Venn diagram showing overlaps between Scl, Hand1 and Gata4 (Odaet al,2013) binding sites in Flk1+mesoderm documents that some of Scl MES binding sites are also bound by cardiac TFs. Similar distribution was observed for Scl binding sites that were shared with Gata4 or Hand1 alone. Many cardiac enhancers also lost Gata4 binding in adult hearts (Supplementary Fig S5C). Likewise, many surface markers of hemogenic endothelium and HS/PCs (e.g. Analysis of the individual genes confirmed intact Scl binding to key cardiac enhancers (Myocardin, Gata4andGata6) in the absence of Gata1 and 2 (Fig7B,Supplementary Fig S7B). Remarkably, while several other Scl binding sites were preserved nearRunx1gene, the binding site that was lost inGata1 2Nonecells corresponds to +23 enhancer that has been shown to be essential forRunx1regulation during HSC emergence (Nottinghamet al,2007) and becomes the strongest Scl binding site in HPC7 hematopoietic progenitor cells (Supplementary Fig S3B). Our data are consistent with a model that the acquisition of a primed, or provisionally activated, state at hematopoietic and cardiac enhancers precedes Scl and Gata1 and 2 binding and determines the available fate options in mesoderm. Our study documents the dynamic nature of Scl binding already in mesoderm. However, Lsd1 binding to cardiac enhancers was not impaired in Scl-deficient cells. RRBS data were aligned with BS-Seeker2 (Guoet al,2013). 