In contrast, reactive rats exhibit low levels of offensive aggression, avoidance of a shock-probe, and high levels of floating (Koolhaas et al., 2007). Specifically, LAL mice showed a longer lasting body weight loss, a greater increase in corticosterone, and increased anxiety- and depression-like behavior following chronic social defeat compared to SAL mice (Veenema et al., 2003). The coping styles of LAL and SAL mice are also associated with differences in 5-HT signaling. LAB rats are characterized by increased inter-male aggression, reduced HPA axis activity to nonsocial stressors, and changes in 5-HT neurotransmission (Veenema and Neumann, 2007). Chronic social defeat in mice is another model system for investigating individual differences in coping with stress. Optogenetic stimulation of the vmPFC reduces depression-like behavior, but not anxiety-like behavior, in susceptible mice (Covington et al., 2010). In addition, following chronic social defeat, resilient mice show increased firing rates in the vmPFC and suppression of amygdala oscillatory activity at social interaction testing (Kumar et al., 2014). Likewise, vmPFC projections to the NAc regulate stress-induced depressive-like behavior as well as motivation for drugs of abuse (Britt et al., 2012,Vialou et al., 2014). Also, prior experience with escapable, but not inescapable, stress increases intrinsic membrane excitability in PL neurons, suggesting that synaptic plasticity within the PL cortex is critical for the immunizing effect of escapable stress exposure (Varela et al., 2012). Similarly, blockade of NMDA receptors and the extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) cascade within the PL prevents the immunizing effect of stressor controllability, suggesting that synaptic plasticity within the PL is necessary for rats to learn this form of stress resistance (Christianson et al., 2014). Interestingly, lesions of the vmPFC do not eliminate the protective effects of wheel running on the development of learned helplessness (Greenwood et al., 2013). However, not all forms of experience-dependent stress resilience require the vmPFC (for a review seeChristianson and Greenwood, 2014). The effects of CRF on the expression of conditioned defeat appear to be mediated by CRF type-2 receptors. Thus, it appears that the psychological aspects of losing generate a physiological stress response and dramatically alter subsequent agonistic behavior (Huhman et al., 1992). A great deal of research indicates that uncontrollable tailshock increases 5-HT activity in the DRN, desensitizes DRN 5-HT1a autoreceptors, and thereby promotes learned helplessness (Maier and Watkins, 2005,Rozeske et al., 2011). We have also found that social defeat in hamsters reduces mRNA expression for 5-HT1a autoreceptors in the DRN (Cooper et al., 2009). The role of CRF in the DRN is another point of contrast between conditioned defeat and learned helplessness. Finally, dominant Anolis lizards exhibit elevated 5-HT concentrations in the amygdala, whereas subordinates show elevated dopamine concentrations in the amygdala (Ling et al., 2009). Also, restricting social play alters dendritic morphology in brain regions that regulate coping with stress such as the mPFC (Bell et al., 2010). In our initial study, we found that dominants exhibit less submissive and defensive behavior during conditioned defeat testing than do subordinates and controls that lack dominant or subordinate status (Morrison et al., 2011). The extent of the behavioral changes observed in conditioned defeat does not appear linked to changes in HPA axis activity. These findings are consistent with other research showing that blocking glucocorticoid synthesis during social defeat does not alter the acquisition of conditioned defeat (Cooper and Huhman, 2010). Resistance to conditioned defeat in dominant hamsters is an active process characterized by increased neural activity in a multi-node circuit that includes brain regions associated with aggression and coping. For example, rats that exhibit an active coping strategy on the defensive burying test show elevated plasma testosterone and a larger number of androgen receptor immune-positive cells in the MeA and BNST (Linfoot et al., 2009). Likewise, male rats carrying a feminizing mutation of the androgen receptor show increased anxiety on the elevated plus maze and open field (Zuloaga et al., 2011,Hamson et al., 2014). Experience-dependent neural plasticity within the vmPFC appears dependent on the environmental factors that promote stress resistance. 