Macrophage infiltration is associated with poor prognosis in several different types of cancer, including breast cancer and melanoma. These oncogenic miRs function in metastasis-associated myeloid cells to promote tumor proliferation and angiogenesis. In addition, knockdown on miR-21 and mir-29a in macrophages impedes tumor cell proliferation. Intriguingly, we found conserved ETS motifs proximal to all 5 miR loci. NoneTo test the hypothesis that ETS2 may regulate these miRs, miR expression was analyzed in mature myeloid cells with deletion ofEts2. Over-expression of miR-21 and miR-29a in macrophages caused increased growth of blood vessels into the matrigel plugs as revealed by CD31 staining whereas knockdown of miR-21 resulted in reduced angiogenesis (Figure 4a,c). We observed that CSF1R-pY723 could be detected in 25-45% IBA1+ cells in all nine human samples tested (Figure 6a). Because earlier studies had revealed that miR-21 and miR-29a are up-regulated in invasive breast cancer, we selected them for further analysis in the brain metastatic tumors. While mir-21 expression was limited to cells that co-expressCsf1rmRNA, miR-29a was found to be highly expressed in other cells, primarily in tumor cells based on nuclear morphology. We observed that the number ofCsf1rmRNA+ cells infiltrating lymph node metastases was higher than in the primary tumor (Figure 6f). In addition, there was a striking increase in miR-29a levels inCsf1r+ cells in lymph node metastases when compared to matched primary tumors (Figure 6g). Further analysis of the CD115+ population demonstrated that a CD14loCD16hinon-classical monocyte populationNonewas significantly expanded in the metastatic cancer patients, while the CD14hiCD16loclassical monocyte population was depleted (Figure 7e). The expression of both miR-21 and miR-29a were significantly up-regulated in the CD115hiCD14loCD16hipopulation in patients with high metastatic tumor burden in visceral organs when compared to patients with limited metastasis (Figure 7g). These studies demonstrate that miR-21 and miR-29a expression is activated in TIMs in mouse models of metastasis, promoting tumor angiogenesis and tumor cell proliferation. Notably, the two oncomiRs are robustly expressed in CSF1R-positive macrophages located in human breast cancer brain and lymph node metastases, while expression is lower in primary tumors. Our studies identified targets downstream of the miRs that enable their pro-tumor function. A negative correlation between the expression of miR-21/miR-29a and key M1 polarizing molecules in metastatic TIMs including IL-12, IL-23 IFN-gamma, PDCD4 and TNF-alpha was observed. A recent study demonstrates that tumor cell secreted miR-21 and miR-29a activate pro-tumor functions in myeloid cells. Inhibiting CSF1 signaling not only altered miR expression in myeloid cells, but also affected tumor cell proliferation and angiogenesis. For microRNA analysis, the nCounter mouse miRNA expression assay from Nanostring Technologies was used. For all experiments, negative control counts were used to set the background for expression of the miRs. For mRNA targets of miRs, the Roche Universal Probe Library system was used. U6 snRNA and snoRNA 202 were used as a housekeeping controls. 