Senescence protects damaged cells from neoplastic transformation by inducing a stable growth arrestNone,None. Concomitant with this arrest, cells secrete a complex mixture of factors referred to as the senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP) or senescence-messaging secretome (SMS)None,None. The SASP can exert opposing and contradictory effectsNone. Initial studies focused on the pro-tumourigenic properties of the SASPNone-Nonebut the SASP also mediates important tumour suppressive effectsNone. Specific components of the SASP such as IGFBP-7, PAI-1, IL-6 and CXCR2-binding chemokines (such as IL-8 or GROalpha) can reinforce senescenceNone-None. The SASP also contributes to the surveillance and elimination of senescent cells by the immune systemNone-None. It is unclear whether pro-senescence effects can be exerted in non-cell-autonomous fashion (paracrine) in addition to cell-autonomous fashion (autocrine) and whether senescence can be transmitted to normal cells. Early experiments where 'young' and 'old' fibroblasts were mixed suggested that senescence was exclusively cell intrinsicNone,Nonealthough more recently a 'bystander senescence' response has been suggestedNone. However, although some factors secreted by senescent cells, such as IL-6, reinforce senescence in an intracrine fashionNone, others like IGFBP-7 can display paracrine effectsNone. In this investigation, we present unequivocal evidence supporting that senescence can be transmitted in a paracrine fashion, and provide insights into the pathways regulating and mediating paracrine senescence. To understand whether cells undergoing OIS can transmit senescence in a non-cell-autonomous manner, we established co-cultures of senescent and normal human IMR90 fibroblasts. Cells were distinguished by expressing an mCherry fluorescent marker in the normal IMR90 cells. The mCherry positive and negative populations were monitored using high content analysis (HCA) microscopy (Fig 1a,Fig S1a, b). We used IMR90-ER:RAS cells expressing a chimeric fusion protein that activates upon treatment with 4-hydroxytamoxifen (4OHT). RAS activation triggers growth arrest, induces senescence effectors and the SASP (Fig S2a). IMR90-ER:RAS cells co-cultured with normal IMR90-mCherry cells also undergo arrest upon 4OHT treatment (Fig 1a, middle). Importantly, normal IMR90-mCherry cells also stopped proliferating when co-cultured with cells undergoing OIS, which suggested a non-cell-autonomous (paracrine) transmission of senescence (Fig 1a, right panel). Controls confirmed that mCherry positive cells did not express ER:RAS (Fig S2b). Normal IMR90-Cherry cells also underwent arrest when co-cultured with IMR90 MEK:ER cells (Fig 1b), an alternative model of OIS (Fig S2c). Expression of the ER binding domain alone, or treatment with 4OHT did not affect the growth of IMR90 ER cells or IMR90 mCherry cells co-cultured with them (Fig 1c,S2d). These experiments were performed using early passage IMR90 cells (Fig S2e) to exclude confounding effects of replicative senescence. Normal human mammary epithelial cells (HMECs) also underwent arrest upon co-culture with HMECs undergoing OIS (HMEC-ER:RAS,Fig 1dcentre andS2f). Moreover, HMEC-ER:RAS cells induced the arrest of normal IMR90 fibroblasts (Fig 1dright,S2g), suggesting that paracrine senescence can be transmitted between different cell types. These results clearly show that senescence can be transmitted. We noted that normal cells arrested with a slight delay compared to cells undergoing OIS in co-cultures (Fig 2a). We hypothesized that this delay could be attributed to a paracrine response, as the induction of SASP components (CXCL1, IL-8, CCL-20, ActivinA or VEGFc) occurred as early as 2-3 days after RAS activation (Fig 2b,S3a). To test whether soluble factors mediate paracrine senescence, we used transwell inserts that ensure physical separation of the cells (Fig 2c,S3b). IMR90 cells at the bottom displayed a senescent morphology and became arrested when co-cultured in the presence of senescent cells in the top chamber (Fig S3b). Next, we co-cultured normal cells and IMR90-ER:RAS for 7 days using transwells. At that point we split the IMR90 cells, and cultured them alone for 14 additional days (Fig 2c). Cells that have undergone paracrine senescence continued displaying features of senescence, suggesting that the transmitted phenotype is stable (Fig 2c). RT-PCR analysis discarded cross-contamination between cells or transmission of the RAS oncogene in the transwell experiments (Fig S3c). To confirm that factors secreted by senescent cells were sufficient to induce paracrine senescence, we exposed normal IMR90 cells to conditioned media (CM) from IMR90 cells expressing active forms of RAS, RAF or MEK. Whereas cells exposed to CM from control cells grew normally, those treated with CM from senescent cultures showed reduced BrdU incorporation with a higher percentage staining positive for SA-beta-Gal (Fig 2d,S3d). The cell arrest persisted after withdrawal of the CM (Fig S3e). Similar results were observed on mouse embryo fibroblasts (MEFs,Fig S3f). As paracrine senescence seemed dependent on soluble factors, we reasoned that its effects should be spatially restricted. To test this, we seeded a 'cluster' of IMR90-ER:RAS cells surrounded by normal IMR90-mCherry cells (Fig 2e). Normal IMR90-mCherry cells in close proximity to the IMR90-ER:RAS cluster (in 3 optical fields, equivalent to up to 1 mm) showed reduced incorporation of BrdU following induction of OIS (Fig 2e). In contrast, normal IMR90-mCherry cells located further ( greater than 1mm) from the cluster were unaffected by RAS activation. Similarly, while CM from cells undergoing OIS ('primary' senescence) triggered paracrine senescence ('secondary'), CM derived from those cells just slowed down the proliferation of normal cells ('tertiary') without inducing SA-beta-galactosidase positive cells (Fig 2fandS3d). These data do not exclude that either cell-to-cell contact or the extracellular matrix contribute to paracrine senescence but establish a restricted transmissibility of senescence by soluble factors. Next we co-cultured IMR90-mCherry and IMR90-ER:RAS cells and monitored the expression of senescence markers and effectors by HCA using thoroughly validated antibodies (Fig S1c-e). Upon activation of RAS, IMR90-ER:RAS cells in the co-cultures displayed high DNA and oxidative damage and upregulated expression of the CDKIs, p16INK4aand p21CIP1, and of IL-8, a component of the SASP (Fig 3a, top centre). Normal cells (IMR90-mCherry) in the co-cultures also showed increased levels of oxidative and DNA damage and activation of p16INK4a, p21CIP1and IL-8 expression, suggesting a full transmission of senescence (Fig 3a, top right). A similar induction of senescent features was observed in normal cells co-cultured with IMR90 MEK:ER cells undergoing OIS (Fig S4a). Global gene expression exposed a high correlation between IMR90 cells undergoing OIS and paracrine senescence (Fig 3bandS4b). Unsupervised hierarchical clustering grouped OIS and paracrine senescence (Fig 3c) and a transcriptional signature associated with senescenceNonewas significantly upregulated during paracrine senescence (Fig 3d). In addition, qRT-PCR confirmed that CDK inhibitors and the SASP were induced during paracrine senescence (Fig S4candTable S1). To understand whether paracrine senescence is commonly associated with senescence, we compared paracrine senescence and OIS induced by MEK activationNoneobserving a significant overlap of upregulated genes (Fig S4d). Moreover, we derived a 'paracrine senescence' signature and used gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) to interrogate its association with senescence transcriptomes. Different human and mouse cell types undergoing replicative, oncogene or stress-induced senescence displayed an enrichment of the 'paracrine senescence' signature (Fig 3eandS4e, f). Amongst them HMEC cells undergoing OIS expressed key SASP components suggesting a similar implementation of paracrine senescence (Fig S4g). The 'paracrine senescence' signature was also associated with murine pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasias (PanIN) and human serrated sessile adenomas (SSAs,Fig 3e,S4f), lesions that are both enriched in senescent cells. To examine whether paracrine senescence depends upon the same genetic networks as OIS, we knocked down key effectors of senescence in IMR90 cells and either exposed them to conditioned media of senescent cells or co-cultured them with cells undergoing OIS. These experiments revealed that the paracrine senescence arrest depends on the activation of p16INK4a, p21CIP1and p53 (Fig 3f,S4h). We next catalogued the secretome of cells undergoing OIS using stable isotope labelling of amino acids in culture (SILAC,Fig 4a). Unbiased quantitative proteomics offered several advantages for breadth of coverage and its ability to detect changes on protein expression not apparent from gene expression profiling (Fig 4b). Amongst the top hits identified, were chemokines, TGFbeta family ligands or VEGF (Fig 4candTable S2.). To identify which factors mediate paracrine senescence, we compiled a collection of 78 chemical compounds targeting their receptors or key downstream pathways activated by the SASP (Table S3). Normal IMR90 cells treated with the drug library were exposed to CM from cells undergoing OIS and BrdU incorporation was assessed 48 h later. Out of the compounds partially impairing the arrest, several targeted the VEGFR2/FLT3, TGFBR1 and CCR2 receptors (Fig 4dandTable S3). These compounds were confirmed to inhibit paracrine senescence in a dose-dependent manner, except the CCR2 inhibitor that exhibited a biphasic effect (Fig 4e). By using RNAi to knock down the expression of CCR2 or the TGFbeta receptors ALK4, ALK5 (also known as TGFBR1) and ALK7, we confirmed their role (Fig 4f, g). These results suggest that multiple factors secreted by senescent cells mediate paracrine senescence. We also interrogated the chemical compounds library for their ability to influence RAS-induced senescence (Fig S5a,Table S3). In addition to the compounds identified as affecting paracrine senescence the 'autocrine senescence screen' showed that inhibition of IL-1R signalling also prevented OIS (Fig 5aandS5a). The comparison between both screens suggested that TGFBR1 inhibitors had a more pronounced effect on 'paracrine' rather than on 'autocrine' senescence (Fig 5a). In fact, although GSEA unveiled an association of TGFbeta1 signalling with both OIS and paracrine senescence (Fig 5b), most TGFbeta-dependent genes were more prominently upregulated during paracrine senescence than OIS (Fig 5c). TGFBR1-type receptors bind multiple TGFbeta family ligandsNone. Although TGFbeta1 was also induced, other ligands of the TGFbeta and BMP branches, including BMP6, BMP2, InhibinA and GDF15, were more acutely upregulated during senescence (Fig 5d,S5b). BMP-like ligands and TGFbeta-like ligands signal through activation of different SMAD family members. The phosphorylation of both SMAD2/3 and SMAD1/5 was upregulated in cells undergoing paracrine senescence (Fig 5e,S5c), corroborating the involvement of both branches of TGFbeta signalling on senescence. The effect of BMP2 on senescence has been reportedNoneand further confirmed by us (Fig S5d). Moreover, combination of blocking antibodies targeting either TGFbeta1, Activin A (a homodimer of Inhibin A) and BMP2, partially rescue the arrest observed during paracrine senescence (Fig 5e). TGFBR1 inhibitors prevented the phosphorylation of SMAD2/3 (Fig 5fandS5e) and blunted the paracrine senescence arrest (Fig 5f). These effects correlated with impaired p15INK4band p21CIP1induction (Fig 5f,S5g) consistent with previous observationsNone. We next investigated whether TGFbeta signalling influence senescencein vivo. We used mouse bearing a conditional Pdx1-driven activated Kras allele (KRasG12D)None. KRasG12Dis a potent oncogene in pancreas, but its tumourigenic properties are restrained by its ability to cause OIS, observed in premalignant PanIN lesionsNone. GSEA showed that TGFbeta signalling was associated with these PanIN lesions (Fig 5g, bottom left). Pdx1-cre KrasNonemice were crossed with a conditional allele lacking TGFbetaR1 (TGFbetaR1None)None(Fig 5g, top left). Lesions observed inPdx1-cre KrasNonemice had characteristics of OIS, with low proliferation and stained positive for SA-beta-Gal (Fig 5g). The OIS was attenuated inPdx1-cre KrasNone/+TGFbetaR1Nonelesions (Fig 5g). ImportantlyPdx1-cre KrasNone/+TGFbetaR1Nonemice succumbed to a mixture of pancreatic and skin cancer in less than 3 months, while only a subset ofPdx1-cre KrasNoneanimals progress to pancreatic cancer, and with latency of over a yearNone,None. As multiple components of the SASP execute paracrine senescence, we searched for factors co-ordinating their expression. We screened factors for their ability to induce IL-6 and IL-8, identifying IL-1alpha as one of the most robust inducers (Fig S6a). IL-1alpha signalling has been implicated in regulating IL-6 and IL-8 on senescenceNone. A more thorough analysis identified IL-1alpha as a potent inducer of multiple SASP components (Fig 6a, b). Moreover expression of IL-1alpha caused a SASP-like response phenocopying cells undergoing OIS (Fig 6c, left). Although cells expressing Inhibin A or TGFbeta induced some SASP components such as IL-8 or CCL2 (Fig S6b), they did not mimick the SASP (Fig 6c, centre). Inhibiting TGFBR1 did not affect the secretome induced by IL-1alpha (Fig 6c, right). In addition, while IL-1alpha inhibition partially prevented induction of IL-8 or CCL2 by TGFbeta, the converse was not true (Fig S6b), suggesting that IL-1 has a more prominent role than TGFbeta signalling in controlling the SASP. GSEA showed that IL-1 signalling was associated with paracrine senescence and OIS both in culture andin vivo(Fig 6dandS6c-d). Molecules involved in IL-1 signalling (such as IRAK family kinases) were also induced during OIS (Fig 6e,S6e). IL-1alpha and IL-1beta are synthesized as precursors. In particular, pro-IL-1beta is inactive until processed by the inflammasome, a multiprotein complex comprising of Caspase1 and several adapter moleculesNone,None. Cells undergoing OIS secreted the processed, mature forms of both IL-1alpha and IL-1beta, suggesting inflammasome activation (Fig 6f). Indeed, IMR90 cells undergoing OIS displayed Caspase1 activity (Fig 6g, left). The inflammasome was also activated during OISin vivo: in BrafV600E-driven murine SSAsNoneand in KrasG12D-driven PanIN lesions (Fig 6g, centre and right). Protein levels of inflammasome components such as Caspase 1, ASC (also known as PYCARD), and NLPR3 (but not NLPR1) were up-regulated during OIS (Fig 6h,S6f) without noticeable changes to their mRNA levels (Fig S6g), suggesting protein stabilization. Cells undergoing OIS secreted NLPR3 and Caspase1, a characteristic of Caspase1-dependent unconventional secretion (Fig S6h)None. Finally, treatment with Caspase 1 or IL-1R inhibitors (Fig 6i,S6i) but not TGFBRI inhibitors (Fig S6j), blunted the expression of SASP components during OIS, suggesting that activation of the inflammasome was a cause rather than an effect of the SASP. Ectopic IL-1alpha expression arrested IMR90 cells (Fig 7a) causing senescence (Fig 7b) accompanied by increased oxidative and DNA damage, and induction of p53 and p21CIP1(Fig 7c,S7a). Conversely, knock down of the IL-1 receptor or inflammasome components partially prevented OIS (Fig 7d). These results were extended using siRNAs targeting downstream adapter molecules of the IRAK family (Fig S7b-d). Treatment with Caspase 1 inhibitors partially prevented the induction of p21CIP1and the cell cycle arrest observed during OIS (Fig 7e), while inhibition of IL-1R signalling either using shRNAs (Fig 7f,S7e) or blocking antibodies targeting IL-1alpha and IL-1beta (Fig S7f) also affected paracrine senescence. We next took advantage of a model where OIS is induced in mouse livers through stable, transposon-mediated transfer of oncogenic Nras (NrasG12V). This model was used to show that senescent hepatocytes undergo immune-mediated clearance (designated "senescence surveillance"), important for tumour suppressionNone. Using this model, we tested whether blockade of IL-1 and other SASP components affected hepatocyte senescence. After injection with the NrasG12Vtransposons, mice were treated daily with the indicated compounds for 12 days (Fig 7g). While the percentage of cells positive for Nras expression was similar 6 days after transduction (Fig S7g), 12 days after injection the percentage was higher in mice treated with either IL-1R inhibitor or a combination of drugs (targeting IL-1R, VEGFR2, CCR2 and TGFBR1), reflecting reduced clearance of senescent hepatocytes by the immune system and/or senescence inhibition. To analyze the effect on senescence we measured p16Ink4aand p21Cip1levels, observing that treatment with IL-1R inhibitor or the drug combination reduced the percentage of senescent hepatocytes (Fig 7h, iandS7h). Treatment with IL-1R inhibitor also resulted in a significant percentage of NRas-positive cells proliferating (Fig S7i). The effect of inhibiting IL-1 was further confirmed using IL-1alpha neutralizing antibodies (Fig S7j). Overall, the above results highlight the relevance of IL-1 signalling and SASP regulation for senescencein vivo. To investigate if paracrine senescence occurs in pathophysiologically relevant conditionsin vivo, mouse and human models of OIS were analyzed. First we revisited the model where OIS is induced in mouse hepatocytes by NrasG12VNone. The senescent hepatocytes are found surrounded by clusters of immune cellsNone(Fig 8a). We observed that many cells in these clusters stained positive for senescence markers (Fig 8a). To confirm these findings, we used Keratin5-Sos Egfrwa2/+transgenic miceNone. These mice develop papillomas with characteristics of OIS as confirmed by staining for p16Ink4aand p21Cip1within the basal and suprabasal layers of the papilloma (Fig 8b). Whilst there were no senescent cells in the tissue close to normal skin, we observed senescent cells present in the Keratin 5-negative tissue adjacent to the senescent papillomas (Fig 8b,S8a). Examination of their morphological features identified fibroblast, lymphocytes and plasma cells, but not cells with epithelial characteristics amongst the senescent cells in the vicinity of papillomas (Fig S8b). Finally, we looked for evidence of paracrine senescence during human tumourigenesis studying SSA. Colon SSAs are mainly driven by activatingBRAFmutations that trigger OISNone,None,None. Epithelial tissue from human SSA but not normal colonic crypts, was positive for senescence markers like p21CIP1aand negative for proliferation markers such as KI-67 (Fig 8c). SASP components such as CCL2 and IL-6 were induced in SSAs (Fig 8dandS8c). Analysis of expression dataNonealso showed the upregulation of IL-1beta and other SASP components in SSA (Fig S8d). Using automated imaging analysis (Fig S8e) we measured a significant increase in p21CIP1apositive cells (Fig 8c, e, p=0.03) or p21CIP1positive/Ki67 negative stromal cells (p=4.6 10-5) close to SSA compared to tissue close to normal colonic crypts. These cells had immune or fibroblast morphology (Fig S8f). These data suggests that senescence can be transmitted in a non-cell-autonomous fashion in both mouse and human models of OISin vivo. The SASP can potentiate the tumourigenic properties of cancer cells, recruit the immune system to eliminate premalignant cellsNone,None,Noneor reinforce senescenceNone. Here we add paracrine senescence to the repertoire of functions regulated by the SASP. Paracrine senescence could be relevant in different scenariosin vivo. As well as reinforcing the arrest of a cell undergoing OIS, its secretome could induce arrest on the surrounding epithelium, expanding the senescent "footprint" of the preneoplastic lesion and promoting their immune clearance. Alternatively, cells undergoing OIS could propagate senescence to the surrounding tissue, as suggested here (Fig 8). Other scenarios are possible; therapy-induced senescence (TIS) influences chemotherapyNone. Radiation can induce a 'bystander response'Nonewhich could be partially explained by paracrine senescence. Clearance of senescent cells is also beneficial for age-associated disordersNone. Therefore, it is worthy investigating whether paracrine senescence mediates the deleterious effects of senescent cells on tissue homeostasis. Not all cells surrounding preneoplastic lesions undergo paracrine senescence. Levels of soluble factors, gradients of their concentration, the susceptibility of different cell types and even whether the cells are dividing or arrested are possible factors influencing which cells undergo paracrine senescencein vivo. The nature of these cells and the functional implications of paracrine senescence remain open questions for future studies. Intriguingly recent work suggest that tumours have the ability to induce p16INK4aexpression in their surrounding stroma and infiltrated immune cellsNone, similar as we observed here. In this study, we identified multiple SASP factors with previous unrecognized roles in controlling senescence e.g. TGFbeta family members (Activin A and GDF15), VEGF, and the chemokines CCL2 and CCL20. Although multiple components of the SASP amplify the response, at least in part by activating NF-kappaBNone,None, IL-1alpha is a key regulator not linked previously with senescence inductionNone. There is a wealth of information on the activation of the inflammasome by infectious agents, but less is known about links with other cellular stresses. The ability of the inflammasome to regulate senescence adds to the pro- and anti-tumour effects of the inflammasomeNone. In conclusion cells undergoing OIS can transmit paracrine senescence to their neighbours. Here, we identified that paracrine senescence is a complex response regulated by the inflammasome and IL-1 signalling. Understanding the significance and regulation of paracrine senescence can be the first step towards manipulating it for therapeutic benefit. 4-hydroxytamoxifen (4OHT) was from Sigma. Ac-YVAD-CMK and z-YVAD-FMK (Caspase-1 inhibitor I and VI) were from Calbiochem. Chemical compounds and concentrations used are summarized inTable S4. Neutralizing antibodies targeting BMP2, TGFbeta1, ActivinA, IL-1alpha and IL-1beta (R D) were used at 10 mug/mL. HEK293T and IMR90 cells were obtained from the ATCC. Cells were maintained as describedNone. HMEC-hTert cells were cultured in mammary epithelial cell growth media (PromoCell). Co-culture of IMR90 and HMEC was carried out in mammary epithelial cell growth media (PromoCell) supplemented with 10% FBS. We used 0.02 mum Anopore cell culture inserts (Nunc-Thermo) for Trans-well co-culture experiments. Cell numbers and cell viability were determined using Guava Viacount reagent (Millipore) and a Guava Cytometer (Millipore). Retroviral and lentiviral infection were performed as previously describedNone,None. pRetroSUPER (pRS) plasmids expressing shRNAs targeting p16INK4a, p53 or p21CIP1and pBABE-RasV12pLNC-ER:RAS and pLNC-MEK:ER have been described previouslyNone. MSCV puro based retroviral plasmid encoding IL-1alpha was generated by cloning its cDNA from pCMV6 IL-1alpha (Origene). pGIPZ-based shRNA vectors targeting ALK4, ALK5, ALK7, IL1R1, CASP1, ASC and TP53 were from SIGMA. These methods have been described elsewhereNone,None. 2*106of the indicated cells were seeded in a 10 cm dish and incubated during 7 days with 200 nM 4OHT in DMEM 0.5 % FBS. After incubation, conditioned media (CM) was collected, centrifuged at 5000g and filtered through a 0.2 mum pore filter. CM was mixed with DMEM 40 % FBS in a proportion of 3 to 1 to generate CM containing 10% FBS. IMR90 fibroblasts were reverse-transfected with 30 nM siRNA using a 3.5% solution of HiPerFect transfection reagent (QIAGEN). AllStars scrambled siRNA served as negative controls. For a list of siRNAs, seeTable S5. RT-qPCR was performed as describedNone. Primer sets and TaqMan Gene Expression Assays (Applied Biosystems) used are listed inTable S6. For global gene expression studies, cRNA was hybridized to Human Gene 1.0 ST arrays (Affymetrix). Microarray data processing and analysis was carried out at EMBL. Data were normalized using Robust Multichip Average (RMA) and differentially expressed genes were identified using Linear Models for MicroArrays (LIMMA). A cut-off of a Benjamini-Hochberg false discovery rate (BH) less than 0.05 was used to identify significant genes. All analyses were carried out in R (v2.13.0). We used GSEA (v2.07) to examine the association between gene sets and gene expression. We ranked the genes by log2fold-change obtained from LIMMA contrasts. Pre-ranked GSEA was performed using curated Molecular Signatures Database (v3.0) with a size of 5-1200 genes (http://www.broadinstitute.org/gsea/msigdb/index.jsp). To define the 'paracrine senescence' signature, genes upregulated greater than 2 fold were chosen. IF was performed as previously describedNoneusing the antibodies listed inTable S7. Image acquisition was performed using an automated high throughput microscope (IN Cell Analyzer 1000 or 2000, GE Healthcare). High content analysis (HCA) was performed, as described elsewhereNone,None,None. Briefly, two or three fluorescence images corresponding to DAPI, primary antibody/Alexa Fluor 488-secondary antibody and Cherry were acquired for each field using the IN Cell Analyzer 1000 or IN Cell Analyzer 2000 automated epifluorescence (GE Healthcare). No less than 1000 cells were acquired. HCA was performed using the IN Cell Investigator software (v1.7; GE Healthcare). DAPI staining was used to identify cells. The nuclei were then segmented using top-hat segmentation. A collar segmentation routine was set to define cell segments. To determine the cellular expression of the analyzed protein or detect the Cherry labelled cells, the mean intensity of pixels in the reference channel (Alexa Fluor 488 or Cherry) within the specified nuclear region (Object Nuclear Intensity) was measured. Each cell was assigned a nuclear intensity value used to set up a threshold filter. The threshold filter used a histogram for data visualization. To set the filter cut-off, expression in control cells was measured to define the negative population, followed by the analysis of the positive control (Fig S1a). As a result, the software classified each cell as either positive or negative for the expression of the analyzed protein or signal (Fig S1b). The mean of the nuclear intensity was routinely analyzed with equivalent results. Antibodies used for the analysis were tested (shRNAs or siRNAs) to assess their specificity (Fig S1c-e). This was carried out as described inNoneTo identify secreted proteins, a filtering step was applied using the Secreted Protein Database's Ranks 0 to 3 and Gonzalez and co-workers "Secreted" or "SPTM" classificationsNone,None. This criteria required proteins to be annotated as either ranks 0 to 2, "Secreted", or as both "SPTM" and rank 0 or 1. 50 mug of cell extracts or 200 mug of pancreatic or colonic tissue protein extracts were incubated with WEHD-AFC substrate for 2 hours (cells) or 6 hours (tissue) and measured in a microplate reader, excited at 400 nm, fluorescence emission at 505 nm. Human chemokine or human cytokine V arrays (Ray Biotech, Inc) were processed and quantified using ImageJ software (NIH). Protein extracts were processed and analyzed as previously describedNone. Experiments were performed according to UK Home office regulations. Mice carrying a conditional Pdx1-Cre KrasG12D/+ alleleNone,Nonewere intercrossed with mice carrying a conditional knockout ALK5/TGBR1 alleleNone. Sections of formalin fixed paraffin embedded mouse pancreas from 6 weeks old mice were stained with antibody against Ki67. The total number of Ki67-positive cells per PanIN, and the total cells per PanIN were counted, and the percentage of Ki67-positive cells per PanIN calculated. The mean score for each mouse was calculated and these scores were plotted on a box plot. SA beta-gal staining was carried out on cryosections of pancreas harvested from 6 week old mice and assessed using a histoscore method taking account of both the intensity of staining and the proportion of each PanIN staining. This was calculated using the formula Sigma(0 * no staining)+(1 * low intensity)+(2 * high intensity). The mean score for each mouse was calculated and these scores were plotted on a box plot. 5 mice of each genotype (3 male and 2 female) were assessed. Statistical significance was assessed using a Mann-Whitney test to compare genotypes. The VEGFR2/Flt3/c-Kit inhibitor (Calbiochem 676500) was dissolved in 2% Ethanol, 5% Tween 80, 20% PEG 400, 73% isotonic NaCl solution and orally applied twice daily at 4 mg/kg body weight. The IL1-R antagonist (Calbiochem 407616) was dissolved in isotonic NaCl solution and applied via intraperitoneal injection every 2ndday at 200mg/kg body weight. RS102895 (Sigma R1903) a CCR2 antagonist was applied via the drinking water at a dose of 10mg/kg/day per mouse. From the TGF-betaRI kinase inhibitor (Calbiochem 616452) a 3.4mM stock solution in DMSO was prepared. Twice daily 100 mul of a 1 to 10 dilution in PBS was injected subcutaneous. For each inhibitor four C57bl6 mice and four control animals (age 4-6 weeks, all males) were used. Treatment started at day -2 and continued until day 12. At day 0 hydrodynamic tail vein injection of a transposon-based Nras expression plasmid together with an expression plasmid for the sleeping beauty 13 transposaseNonewas performed. At day 12 the animals were sacrificed and livers collected. Samples were fixed and subjected to IHC analysis. Microscopic analyses were performed using Axio Imager M2 (Zeiss). Five high power fields were counted on two liver sections from each mouse liver (200*, greater than 200 counted cells per field). 4 weeks old wild type or K5-Sos Egfrwa2/+mice (heterozygous for a hypomorphic form of EgfrNone) were used for the experiments (equal ratios of male and female). Normal skin or papilloma samples were isolated from the tail, fixed over night in 4% PFA and then embedded in paraffin for IHC analysis. Pseudo-anonymized human FFPE tissue samples from 9 patients with sessile serrated adenomas (SSA) that were resected endoscopically were provided by the Tissue Bank of the National Center for Tumor Diseases Heidelberg (project no. 841) after approval by the ethics committee (no. 206/2005, Medical Faculty, Heidelberg, Germany). IHC was carried out on 3-mum sections. BRAF V600E specific IHC (clone VE1) was performed on an automated immunostainer (Ventana BenchMark XT, Ventana Medical Systems, Tucson, Arizona, USA) as previously describedNone. The settings included pretreatment with cell conditioner 1 for 60 min, incubation with undiluted VE1 hybridoma supernatant at 37 degrees C for 32 min and signal enhancement with the Ventana amplification kit (catalogue number 760-080). For Ki-67 (clone MIB-1, Dako, 1:400) and p21WAF1/Cip1 (clone SX118, DAKO, 1:25) antigens were retrieved using alkaline buffer (pH 9, Dako, Glostrup, Denmark). The latter stainings were performed using the TechmateTM 500+ automated staining system (Dako) with the Avidin-Biotin Complex method. p21 and Ki-67 positive nuclei in the tumor stroma were counted per area using virtual microscopy (SpectrumTM Version 11.0.0.725, Image scope v11.0.2.725, Aperio Technologies, Vista, CA, USA). For statistical evaluation the p21 to KI-67 ratio was determined and compared using the non-parametrical Wilcoxon rank sum test. Significance levels were denoted as: *P less than = 0.05, **P less than = 0.01 and ***P less than = 0.001. Sources for statistical data are provided inTable S8.