Dry eye disease (DED) is an extremely common ocular disorder affecting tens of millions of people worldwideNone,Noneand is associated with a diverse array of etiopathogenic factors. NoneDespite the advent of several therapeutics, notably topical cyclosporine A for DED, there remains a significant unmet medical need. It was only during the last decade that ocular surface inflammation was recognized as a hallmark of DEDNoneand T cell infiltration of the ocular surface was identified in a wide spectrum of patients with DED;None,Nonehowever, the immunopathogenic mechanisms that mediate chronic DED have yet to be fully described. The cellular and molecular mechanisms that underlie inflammation in DED have been investigated with a variety of experimental models. It has been demonstrated that CD4+T cells mediate DED induction in mice;None,Nonefurthermore, CD4+T cell subsets, including Th1 and Th17 cells, are now thought to be the major effector cells in DED. None,None,NoneInterestingly, regulatory T cells (Tregs), which normally suppress immune responses, have also been found to be dysfunctional in DED. NoneHowever, it is unclear to what extent these pathogenic findings seen in an acute care setting can be directly related to those found in a clinical setting, where DED is generally encountered as a chronic disorder. In the present study, we provide, for the first time, a useful animal model of chronic DED and test the hypothesis that the chronic inflammation in DED is mediated by memory T cells. We examine the immunoinflammatory responses on the ocular surface in chronic DED, and characterize the phenotypes of the involved T cells. Furthermore, we determine whether or not the T cells from chronic DED can adoptively transfer the disease to immunocompetent naive hosts. A widely used murine model of DEDNone,Nonewas modified to mirror the long-term, fluctuating course of human DED. NoneFollowing the initial 14 d of desiccating stress, mice were housed in a standard, non-desiccated vivarium for 4 mo without any pharmacologic manipulations such as use of scopolamine or other anti-cholinergics (Figure 1a). Clinical disease severity peaked at the end of the desiccating challenges (day 14), as demonstrated by elevated corneal fluorescein staining scores (a common clinical readout for the severity of corneal epitheliopathy),None,Noneand decreased aqueous tear secretion. Upon removal from the desiccating environment, corneal epitheliopathy gradually regressed to lower levels, but never normalized, through the end of observation (day 126) (Figure 1a,b). Meanwhile, aqueous tear secretion returned to normal, or even supra-normal levels, indicating that DED with mild corneal epitheliopathy persisted despite the resolution of aqueous tear deficiency or even with an enhanced compensatory tear secretion by the lacrimal apparatus. This demonstrated, for the first time, that following the induction of acute DED, ocular surface inflammation, as characterized by corneal epitheliopathy, persisted into a long-term chronic phase, even without continued exposure to desiccating stress. Since corneal epitheliopathy is the most evaluated clinical sign of DED,None,Noneand absence of tear deficiency is very commonly seen in clinical DED patients,Nonethe persistent ocular surface inflammation indicates the development of a chronic DED state. We next sought to determine the immunoinflammatory factors that could be responsible for the corneal epitheliopathy observed in chronic DED. Our results in acute DED (day 14) (Figure 1c) were consistent with previous findings indicating that there is increased Th1-associated IFN-gammaNoneand Th17-associated IL-17 in the conjunctiva. None,NoneHowever, in chronic DED (day 126), conjunctival IFN-gamma returned to near-normal levels, while IL-17 levels remained elevated at a level comparable to those found in acute DED (Figure 1c). These findings suggest that chronic DED is associated with a Th17 response. We further examined whether chronic DED is accompanied by corneal angiogenesis. Previous studies from our lab have demonstrated that there is significant and exclusive growth of lymphatic (not blood) vessels in acute DED corneas,Noneand that the selective lymphangiogenesis in cornea is due to IL-17-driven expression of pro-lymphangiogenic factors. NoneIn the present study, chronic DED corneas did not demonstrate regression, but displayed progressive ingrowth of these selectively formed lymphatics toward the center of corneas (Figure 1d). To determine if the T cells generated in DED are indeed pathogenic, we next investigated whether or not the T cells isolated from chronic DED can induce disease in naive mice. T cells from the various groups (normal, acute DED, and chronic DED) were adoptively transferred to naive mice, and these mice were subsequently challenged with desiccating environmental stress without scopolamine (Figure 2a). Chronic DED-T cell recipients developed clinical disease much more rapidly, and in a more severe form than did normal (non-DED) T cell-transferred or acute DED-T cell-transferred recipients (Figure 2b). The highest Th17 responses were observed in recipients of chronic DED-T cells on day 6 after challenge (Figure 2c), suggesting a close link between the Th17 response and DED severity. In contrast, there were no increased Th1 responses in chronic DED-T cell-transferred recipients (Figure 2c). Recipients of acute DED-T cells exhibited only a slightly higher disease score on day 6 after challenge than did recipients of normal T cells (Figure 2b), with comparable Th17 responses (Figure 2c). Although recipients of acute DED-T cells demonstrated the strongest Th1 responses (Figure 2c), this was not paralleled by simultaneous development of clinical disease severity, suggesting that the Th17 response was the dominant pathogenic factor. Phenotypic and functional assays were employed to further delineate the CD4+T cell populations in normal, acute DED, and chronic DED mice. Draining lymph nodes and spleens were harvested, and their CD4+T cell populations were analyzed for naive, effector, and effector memory T cells, using flow cytometry analysisNone(Figure 3a). As expected, normal T cells contained the highest frequencies of CD62L+CD44lonaive T cells (TN), accounting for 50% of the total CD4+population. Compared to normal T cells, acute DED-T cells contained significantly more CD62L-CD44loeffector T cells (TE), while chronic DED-T cells contained the highest frequency of CD62L-CD44hieffector memory T cells (TM). The most prominent fraction in each group (i.e., TNfrom normal, TEfrom acute DED, and TMfrom chronic DED) were sorted and functionally characterized. TN(naive) exhibited baseline levels of IFN-gamma+and IL-17+cell frequencies. Both TE(effector) and TM(memory) demonstrated increased IFN-gamma+and IL-17+cell frequencies. While TEand TMshowed similar frequencies of IFN-gamma+cells, TMcontained twice as many IL-17+cells as TE. In addition, the frequencies of IL-17+cells in TMwere several-fold higher than those of IFN-gamma+cells (Figure 3b). No differences were noted in CD4+CD25+Foxp3+Treg frequencies among TN, TEand TMgroups (data not shown). Next, to determine whether the CD4+CD62L-CD44hiTMfraction of chronic DED-T cells can mediate chronic DED, these TMwere adoptively transferred to naive mice, with TNand TEas controls, and recipient mice were subjected to desiccating stress (without use of scopolamine) (Figure 4a). TMrecipients exhibited faster onset and significantly higher level of severity of the disease than did recipients of either TNor TE(Figure 4b). TEand TNrecipients experienced similar courses of disease progression except for the timing of disease onset (day 2), when the TErecipients had a higher disease score. The fact that TMcontained more IL-17-producing cells and comparable Treg cells at the time of transfer suggests that the higher clinical disease score observed in the recipients of TMwas due primarily to the effector memory Th17-driven immune responses. To confirm this hypothesis, ocular surface and draining lymphoid tissues were harvested for examination of Th17/Th1 responses at day 12 after challenge. Both cornea (Figure 4c) and conjunctiva (Figure 4d) from the TMrecipients demonstrated significantly increased IL-17 but not IFN-gamma protein levels in comparison to those of the TNor TErecipients, or naive mice, though the substantial increase of corneal IL-17 expression in the TMrecipients compared to TErecipients did not reach statistic significance. In concordance with disease severity, TNand TErecipients showed similar increases in IFN-gamma and IL-17. Consistent with the ocular surface findings, the draining lymph nodes of TMrecipients exhibited the highest frequencies of Th17 cells (Figure 4e). Herein, we have demonstrated that chronic DED involves persistent ocular surface inflammation associated with a Th17 response. A significant effector memory Th17 population can be recovered from chronic DED and shown to mediate the long-term course of the disease. The current study reveals, for the first time, that the corneal epithelial damage mediated by ocular surface inflammation in DED persists long term. However, the underlying immune response changes with time. Although the acute phase of DED exhibits both Th1 and Th17 responses as indicated in previous reportsNone,Noneand the present study, the chronic phase of DED only is mediated by a Th17 response alone, including increased IL-17 expression and lymphangiogenesis on the ocular surface. These lymphatic vessels are potential conduits for immune cell migration between the ocular surface and draining lymphoid tissues. NoneWe have noted that the selective lymphangiogenesis in cornea is due to IL-17-driven expression of pro-lymphangiogenic factors. NoneTherefore, we speculate that the persistent and progressively ingrowing lymphatic vessels in chronic DED corneas are due, at least in part, to the elevated levels of IL-17. Together, these findings suggest that relentless Th17 response at the ocular surface, even in the absence of triggering factors, could be one of the critical inflammatory pathways operating in the vicious cycle of DED. NonePreviously, Yoon et al. Nonefound that some parameters of experimental DED severity normalize following the removal of desiccating stress. In their study, acute DED was induced using a methodology similar to ours, for 10 d, followed by maintenance in the standard vivarium for 28 d. They found that tear production, corneal smoothness, conjunctival goblet cell density, and conjunctival CD4+T cell density normalized by day 28 in the standard vivarium. However, that study had several limitations. Clinically, the authors did not perform the important corneal epithelial defect assessment using corneal fluorescein staining, as is recommended by the National Eye Institute/Industry workshop for DED evaluation. NoneFurthermore, although the numbers of conjunctival CD4+T cells were counted, their cytokine secretion function was not examined. In addition to the experimental data provided herein, several other clinical reports have indicated that DED is associated with a T cell-mediated immune response, as evidenced by increased infiltration of T cells in the conjunctivaNoneand elevated levels of T cell cytokines, including IFN-gammaNoneand IL-17Nonein the tears. However, it is not known whether this immune response is a cause or consequence of DED. In the present study, we demonstrate that T cells from the chronic DED mice can efficiently induce the disease in the naive host, indicating that these T cells are pathogenic during the course of the disease. Further phenotypic analysis of the T cells shows a significant effector memory population, where secretion of IL-17 predominates over that of IFN-gamma. This finding is consistent with the most recent recognition on the nature of Th17 cells as long-lived effector memory cells. None,NonePreviously, it was assumed that both human and mouse Th17 cells are short-lived effector T cells. However, a recent study on human Th17 cells reveals that these cells have a high capacity for proliferative self-renewal, potent persistence, and apoptotic resistance. NoneSubsequently, mouse Th17 cells have been found not only to be long lived but also to be empowered with an enhanced ability to enter the memory pool. NoneThese novel discoveries support the association of Th17 cells with various autoimmune diseases such as multiple sclerosis, Crohn's disease, uveitis, and graft-versus-host disease,None,None,None,Noneand support their proposed long-term anti-tumor activity. None,NoneNext, we examined whether or not the effector memory T cell population contributes to the protracted damage to the ocular surface identified in chronic DED. Compared to the transfer of effector T cells to naive recipients, effector memory T cells elicited a more severe DED which was similar to total T cell transfer, indicating that effector memory T cells is the principal subpopulation mediating the disease. However, effector T cells also induced a higher disease score than did naive T cells only at disease onset, suggesting that effector T cells act for a short time, possibly because of their susceptibility to activation-induced cell death. NoneIn contrast, effector memory T cells demonstrated a strong and lasting effect on the disease, which can be attributed to their rapid expansion and resistance to apoptosis. None,NoneIn summary, the current work demonstrates that the persistent immunoinflammatory responses in chronic DED exhibit hallmarks of IL-17-mediated pathology, and implicates effector memory Th17 cells as the principal effector cells in maintaining chronic DED. These findings suggest a pathogenic role of autoimmunity in DED and expand our understandings of memory T cell response in chronic disease states. Accordingly, immunomodulatory therapies that target effector memory Th17 cells may effectively treat DED. Female C57BL/6 mice aged 6 to 8 wk (Charles River Laboratories, Wilmington, MA) were used for this study. All animal experiments were approved by the Schepens Eye Research Institute Animal Care and Use Committee, and adhered to the Association for Research in Vision and Ophthalmology Statement for the Use of Animals in Ophthalmic and Vision Research. Acute DED was induced in mice as previously described, with some modification. NoneMice were placed in a controlled-environment chamber with a relative humidity below 20%, airflow of 15 L/min, and a constant temperature of 21 to 23 degrees C, for 14 consecutive d. To maximize ocular surface dryness, mice received s.c. 0.1 mL injections of 5 mg/mL scopolamine hydrobromide (Sigma-Aldrich Corp, St. Louis, MO). Chronic DED was developed by transferring acute DED mice to a standard vivarium (temperature: 21 ~ 23 degrees C, relative humidity: 40% ~ 60%) and maintained for an additional 4 mo without any environmental or anti-cholinergic (scopolamine) desiccating challenge. Corneal fluorescein staining and the National Eye Institute grading system (NEI, Bethesda, MD) was used to evaluate corneal epithelial damage caused by DED. NoneBriefly, 1 ul of 2.5% fluorescein (Sigma-Aldrich Corp) was applied into the lateral conjunctival sac of the mice and after 3 minutes corneas were examined with a slit lamp biomicroscope under cobalt blue light. Punctate staining was recorded in a masked fashion with the standard National Eye Institute grading system of 0 to 3 for each of the five areas of the cornea - central, superior, inferior, nasal and temporal. The cotton thread test was used to evaluate aqueous tear production as previously described. NoneBriefly, a phenol red thread (Zone-Quick; Lacrimedics, Eastsound, WA) was placed in the lateral canthus of the conjunctival fornix of the right eye for 30 seconds after excess tears had been removed for a standard time of 4 seconds and tear distance (in millimeters) was read under a microscope. Freshly excised corneas were washed in PBS, fixed in acetone for 15 min, and double stained with CD31 and LYVE-1 antibodies (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA). Subsequently, the corneas were mounted using VECTASHIELDA(r)mounting medium (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA) and visualized under an epifluorescence microscope (Model E800; Nikon, Melville, NY) with a 2* objective lens at 20* magnification, and then the digitial micrographs were captured. Contrast of these acquired micrographs were linearly adjusted using Photoshop CS2 (Adobe, San Jose, CA) before the lymphatic area was calculated using Fiji software. None,NoneCorneas and conjunctivae from mice were harvested, frozen in TRIzol(r)Reagent (Invitrogen Corp, Carlsbad, CA) and stored at -80 degrees C until use. Total RNA was isolated with an RNeasy(r)Micro kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA) according to the manufacturer's recommendations and reverse transcribed using a SuperScriptTMIII kit (Invitrogen Corp). Real-time PCR was performed using TaqMan(r)Universal PCR Master Mix (Roche, Branchburg, NJ) and predesigned primers for IL-1beta (Mm00434228_m1), IL-23 (Mm00518984_m1), IFN-gamma (Mm00801778_m1), IL-17 (Mm00439619_m1) and GAPDH (Mm99999915_g1) (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) in a LightCycler(r)480 II System (Roche Applied Science, Indianapolis, IN). The GAPDH gene was used as an endogenous control for each reaction. The results of quantitative PCR were analyzed by the comparative CTmethod in which the target change = 2-DeltaDeltaCT. The results were normalized by the CTvalue of GAPDH, and the mean CTof relative mRNA levels in the normal group was used as the calibrator. For protein extraction, corneas, conjunctivae and draining lymph nodes were harvested and stored in cold sterile PBS containing protease inhibitors (Sigma-Aldrich Corp) at -80 degrees C until use. The samples were homogenized on ice and centrifuged. The supernatant was assayed for levels of IFN-gamma and IL-17 using commercial ELISA kits (eBioscience, San Diego, CA). Cells were triple stained with the following antibodies: FITC-conjugated anti-CD4, APC-conjugated anti-CD44, and PE-conjugated anti-CD62L (BioLegend, San Diego, CA). For intracellular IFN-gamma and IL-17 staining, cells were stimulated with 50 ng/mL phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate and 500 ng/mL ionomycin (Sigma-Aldrich Corp) for 6 h at 37 degrees C and 5% CO2in the presence of GolgiStopTM(4 ul per 6 mL cell culture), (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA) to inhibit cytokine secretion. The cells were then stained for FITC-conjugated anti-CD4, APC-conjugated anti-INF-gamma, and PE-conjugated anti-IL-17; or PE-Cy5-conjugated anti-CD4, FITC-conjugated anti-CD44, PE-conjugated anti-CD62L, Alexa Fluor(r)700-conjugated anti-INF-gamma, and PE-Cy7-conjugated anti-IL-17 (BioLegend). Control samples were stained with appropriate isotype-matched control antibodies. Stained cells were examined with an LSR II Flow CytometerTM (BD Biosciences), and the results were analyzed using Summit v4.3 software (Dako Colorado Inc, Fort Collins, CO). Draining lymph node and spleen cells from normal, acute DED, and chronic DED mice were pooled separately and enriched for T cells with CD90.2 magnetic cell isolation kit (Miltenyi Biotec Inc, Cambridge, MA). 1 * 106cells were then adoptively transferred i.v. into each naive recipient. For fractional T cell adoptive transfer, draining lymph node and spleen cells from normal, acute DED, and chronic DED mice were pooled separately and enriched for CD4+T cells with a negative magnetic cell isolation kit (Miltenyi Biotec Inc). The CD4+T cells were then quantified, stained with FITC-conjugated anti-CD44 and PE-conjugated anti-CD62L, and sorted for naive (TN), effector (TE), and effector memory (TM) T cells using a MoFlo(r)Fluorescence Activated Cell Sorter (FACS) (Dako Cytomation, Carpinteria, CA). 5 * 105cells were adoptively transferred i.v. into each naive recipient. An unpaired, two-tailed Student's t test was used, and differences were considered significant atp less than 0.05.