Excessive islet cholesterol impairs insulin secretion in mouse models (1), yet normal insulin secretion is dependent on sufficient beta-cell intracellular (2) and plasma membrane (3,4) cholesterol. Recent evidence also suggests that impairment of cellular cholesterol efflux and consequent cholesterol accumulation affects beta-cell function and insulin secretion in vitro (5-7) and in mouse models (8,9). The ATP-binding cassette transporter subfamily A member 1 (ABCA1) is a membrane transporter that plays an important role in cholesterol efflux and HDL particle production. In mice, beta-cell-specific loss ofABCA1leads to impaired glucose tolerance due to defective insulin secretion associated with increased islet cholesterol (8,9). In humans, loss-of-function mutations inABCA1are associated with reduced HDL-cholesterol (HDL-C) levels that are nearly absent in the rare homozygous state (Tangier disease) with accumulation of cholesterol in macrophages (10). Data in older subjects heterozygous forABCA1mutations indicate an impaired first-phase insulin response to glucose (11); however, interpretation of these results is limited by disproportionately greater statin use in mutation carriers (12). We sought to determine whether loss-of-function mutations inABCA1affect insulin secretion in humans by applying state-of-the-art methods to the study of subjects homozygous and heterozygous forABCA1mutations and normal control subjects. Because HDL-C itself has been known to affect insulin secretion (7,13), to account for ABCA1-independent effects possibly attributable to low HDL-C, we similarly studied subjects with isolated low HDL-C levels (primary hypoalphalipoproteinemia) and no identifiable mutations inABCA1. Subjects with isolated low HDL-C levels ( less than 25th percentile) were identified from the University of Pennsylvania Preventive Cardiovascular Program databases. Subjects with metabolic syndrome, as defined by the American Heart Association/National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute guidelines (14), were excluded. If not already known, DNA of subjects with low HDL-C levels was isolated from blood, and theABCA1gene was sequenced as previously described (15). Subjects with low HDL-C were classified by analysis forABCA1loss-of-function mutations as homozygous (Tangier disease), heterozygous, or wild type (primary hypoalphalipoproteinemia). Normal control subjects were screened for normal levels of HDL-C and paired-matched by sex, race, age, BMI, and fasting glucose to anABCA1heterozygous subject or to a subject with isolated low HDL-C (primary hypoalphalipoproteinemia). The University of Pennsylvania Institutional Review Board approved the study, and all subjects gave written informed consent to participate. Subjects were admitted to the University of Pennsylvania Clinical and Translational Research Center and were required to fast overnight for 12 h before testing. Catheters were placed in an antecubital vein for infusions (where applicable) and in a warmed contralateral hand vein, retrograde when possible, for sampling arterialized venous blood. All metabolic tests were conducted on separate days. For the oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT), baseline blood samples were taken at -5 and -1 min before the ingestion of 75 g anhydrous glucose in solution over a 5-min period starting att= 0. Additional samples were collected att= 10, 20, 30, 60, 90, 120, 150, and 180 min after ingestion. The glucose-potentiated arginine (GPA) test followed established methodology for evaluation of beta-cell function (16,17). Baseline blood samples were taken at -5 and -1 min before the injection of 5 g 10% arginine over a 1-min period starting att = 0. Additional samples were collected att = 2, 3, 4, and 5 min after injection. Att = 10 min, a hyperglycemic clamp technique (18) using a variable rate infusion of 20% glucose was performed to achieve a plasma glucose concentration of ?230 mg/dL. After 45 min of the glucose infusion (att = 55 min), a 5-g arginine pulse was injected again with identical sampling. Then, a 2-h period with no glucose infusion took place to allow glucose levels to return to baseline, after which a second hyperglycemic clamp of identical duration was performed to achieve a plasma glucose concentration of ?340 mg/dL, and a 5-g arginine pulse was injected again with identical sampling. The method for the frequently sampled intravenous glucose tolerance (FSIGT) test and the calculations used to obtain FSIGT test-derived parameters are provided in theSupplementary Data. Lipid parameters were assessed using standard laboratory procedures. Plasma glucose was measured in duplicate by the glucose oxidase method using an automated YSI 2300 glucose analyzer (Yellow Springs Instruments, Yellow Springs, OH). Plasma insulin and C-peptide were measured in duplicate by double-antibody radioimmunoassays (Millipore, Billerica, MA). Samples from matched case subjects and normal control subjects were assayed simultaneously. Oral glucose tolerance was evaluated as the incremental area under the curve for glucose values obtained during the OGTT, with similar calculations made for insulin. The GPA parameters of acute insulin response (AIRarg) and C-peptide response to arginine were calculated as the mean of the 2-, 3-, 4-, and 5-min values minus the mean of the baseline values (16-18). Acute responses during the 230 mg/dL glucose clamp enable determination of glucose potentiation of arginine-induced insulin (AIRpot) and C-peptide release. Acute responses during the 340 mg/dL glucose clamp allow for determination of the maximum arginine-induced insulin (AIRmax) and C-peptide release (i.e., beta-cell secretory capacity) (19). The mean glucose infusion rate required during the 230 mg/dL glucose clamp (M) was divided by the mean prestimulus insulin level (I) between 40 and 45 min of the glucose infusion to determine insulin sensitivity (M/I) (16). The disposition index (DI) was then calculated as the product of AIRargand M/I, as previously validated (16). All data are expressed as means +/- SE unless specified. Comparison of test parameters between theABCA1homozygous subjects and normal control subjects was performed with the unpaired Studentttest, and comparisons betweenABCA1heterozygous subjects and their matched normal control subjects and between isolated low HDL-C subjects and their matched normal control subjects were performed with the paired Studentttest or Wilcoxon matched-pairs test, as appropriate (20). Analyses were conducted using Statistica software (StatSoft, Inc., Tulsa, OK), with significance considered atP less than 0.05 (two-tailed). Three subjects homozygous and eight heterozygous for mutations inABCA1and nine with isolated low HDL-C but with no identifiable mutations inABCA1were enrolled in the study. Normal control subjects were recruited to match by design the sex, ethnicity, age, BMI, and fasting glucose of theABCA1heterozygous and the low HDL-C subjects (Table 1). All subjects carryingABCA1mutations had a lipid profile consistent with loss-of-function mutations. Of note,ABCA1homozygous subjects had lower LDL-C levels and higher fasting insulin levels, and the isolated low HDL-C group exhibited elevated triglyceride levels relative to their respective control groups. Subject characteristicsData are means +/- SD.ApoA-I, apoprotein A-I; ApoB, apoprotein B. *P less than 0.05 case vs. control subjects. P less than 0.001 case vs. control subjects. P less than 0.0001 case vs. control subjects. Oral glucose tolerance was enhanced in theABCA1homozygous subjects compared with the control subjects (P less than 0.05), a finding associated with higher peak insulin levels for two of theABCA1homozygous subjects (Fig. 1NoneandNone). Samples from the third homozygous subject were affected by gross hemolysis that invalidated the insulin assay. Oral glucose tolerance was not different between theABCA1heterozygous subjects and their control subjects (Fig. 1None) or between the isolated low HDL-C subjects and their control subjects (Fig. 1None). Similarly, the corresponding insulin responses (Fig. 1NoneandNone) were not different. Plasma glucose (AandB) and insulin (CandD) levels during the 75-g OGTT inABCA1homozygous (n= 3),ABCA1heterozygous (n= 8), and matched normal control (n= 8) subjects (AandC) and in isolated low HDL-C (n= 9) and matched normal control (n= 9) subjects (BandD). The incremental area under the curve (AUC) for glucose was 1,255 +/- 1,543, 4,369 +/- 1,115, and 5,565 +/- 914 mg/dL ? min forABCA1homozygous, heterozygous, and control subjects, respectively (P less than 0.05 forABCA1homozygous vs. control subjects), and 4,060 +/- 1,154 and 3,686 +/- 1,205 mg/dL ? min for the isolated low HDL-C subjects and their control subjects. The AUC for insulin was 7,786 +/- 1,951 and 5,811 +/- 763 muU/mL ? min for theABCA1heterozygous subjects and their control subjects and 7,062 +/- 1,221 and 5,195 +/- 629 muU/mL ? min for the isolated low HDL-C subjects and their control subjects. Not shown are the insulin levels of oneABCA1homozygous subject whose samples were affected by gross hemolysis that invalidated the insulin assay. In theABCA1homozygous subjects, AIRargand AIRpottended to be greater (P less than = 0.1) and AIRmaxwas significantly greater than in control subjects (0.05;Table 2andFig. 2None). InABCA1heterozygous subjects, AIRargwas not different; however, AIRpotand AIRmaxwere significantly greater than in the control group (0.05;Table 2andFig. 2None). In subjects with isolated low HDL-C, AIRarg,AIRpot, and AIRmaxwere all significantly greater than in control subjects (0.05;Table 2andFig. 2None). Similar results were seen with C-peptide (Table 2andFig. 2None,None, andNone). GPA test parametersData are means +/- SE. ACRarg, acute C-peptide response to arginine under fasting conditions; ACRmax, acute C-peptide response to arginine under ?340 mg/dL glucose clamp conditions; ACRpot, acute C-peptide response to arginine under ?230 mg/dL glucose clamp conditions. aP less than = 0.1 case subjects vs. control subjects. *P less than 0.05 case subjects vs. control subjects. P less than 0.01 case subjects vs. control subjects. Plasma insulin (A, C, andE) and C-peptide (B, D, andF) levels in response to bolus injections of arginine (arrows) administered under fasting, ?230 mg/dL hyperglycemic clamp, and ?340 mg/dL hyperglycemic clamp conditions inABCA1homozygous (n= 3) (AandB),ABCA1heterozygous (n= 8) (CandD), and matched normal control (n= 8) subjects and in isolated low HDL-C (n= 9) and matched normal control (n= 9) subjects (EandF). Insulin sensitivity (M/I) was not different between theABCA1mutation homozygotes or heterozygotes and their normal control subjects, but M/I was significantly less in isolated low HDL-C subjects than in control subjects (0.01;Table 2). The resulting DIwas not different between theABCA1mutation groups or the isolated low HDL-C group and their respective control groups. Findings from the FSIGT test showed no differences in the first-phase insulin release to glucose inABCA1mutation carriers and overall were consistent with those obtained during the GPA test (Supplementary Data). These results demonstrate enhanced beta-cell secretory capacity in young adults heterozygous for loss-of-function mutations in the gene encoding the cholesterol transporter ABCA1. This effect was even more dramatic in homozygous subjects with Tangier disease, suggesting a gene-dose effect as also seen on HDL-C levels. Importantly, insulin sensitivity was not impaired in the subjects with mutations inABCA1, indicating that the effect of loss of ABCA1 function on augmenting insulin secretion is independent from insulin sensitivity. Significantly increased insulin secretion was only revealed under hyperglycemic clamp conditions that are necessary to demonstrate the reserve capacity for insulin release. In the homozygous subjects, increased insulin secretion was also apparent during oral glucose administration and associated with enhanced oral glucose tolerance. Because cellular cholesterol is required for the formation of insulin secretory granules (2), these results highlight the importance of cellular cholesterol homeostasis for beta-cell function. The current study was designed to assess the relevance in humans of data obtained in a mouse model of beta-cell-specific loss ofABCA1(8), characterized by impaired glucose tolerance due to defective insulin secretion associated with increased islet cholesterol (8). Vergeer et al. (11) recently reported a study in heterozygous carriers of mutations inABCA1. Similar to our results, they demonstrated normal insulin sensitivity; however, in contrast to our results, they exhibited impaired first-phase insulin release and normal instead of enhanced beta-cell secretory capacity (11). Our cohort of relatively young heterozygous subjects differs from the cohort reported by Vergeer et al. (11), who were older and had higher levels of LDL-C. These findings may represent an interaction between more advanced age and/or higher levels of LDL-C in older carriers ofABCA1mutations on beta-cell function, whereby decades of enhanced secretion, accumulation of intracellular cholesterol, and/or LDL-C exposure may eventually predispose to islet dysfunction. In addition, many of these older subjects were treated with hydroxymethylglutaryl-CoA reductase inhibitors (statins) that increase the risk of diabetes in older individuals (12). Future testing of the influence of age and systemic cholesterol availability on the effect ofABCA1mutations on insulin secretion is warranted. The mechanism for the increased insulin secretion with ABCA1 loss of function is not known. Because ABCA1 is important in the maintenance of cholesterol homeostasis, it is possible that intracellular or membrane cholesterol concentration plays an important role in insulin secretion (1-4). Importantly, human beta-cells contain lipid-storage vesicles that may enable the accommodation of excess cholesterol not possible in rodent islets (21). We hypothesize that although ABCA1 deficiency may lead to a slight increase in cellular cholesterol, this does not become excessive in the context of the low concentration of plasma LDL-C as found in our subjects with Tangier disease and enables the establishment of a new set point for cellular cholesterol homeostasis. This new set point may be advantageous for the function of cells with high secretory demand, such as the beta-cell, and likely explains the enhanced beta-cell secretory capacity reported here. We observed increased insulin secretion and impaired insulin sensitivity in our cohort of subjects with primary isolated low HDL-C. These subjects displayed appropriate beta-cell adaptation for the impaired insulin sensitivity, as indicated by increased insulin responses under fasting conditions such that the DIremained normal. The mechanism for impaired insulin sensitivity this group is unknown, although the absence of this finding in subjects withABCA1mutations supports its independence from ABCA1 function. In conclusion, loss-of-function mutations affecting the cellular cholesterol transporter ABCA1 results in enhanced beta-cell secretory capacity in young adults, possibly by altering the cellular set point of cholesterol availability for secretory granule formation and function. Further investigation is required to determine whether the initial hypersecretion leads to beta-cell secretory dysfunction with aging. Through its association with effects on insulin secretion, the targeting of cellular cholesterol homeostasis will likely lead to novel approaches for the prevention and treatment of diabetes.