The traditional limitation of magnetic resonance (MR) is low sensitivity because of low thermal equilibrium polarization (P?10-5-10-6). This limitation can be overcome by hyperpolarized magnetic resonance (HP-MR), which can boostPby several orders of magnitude. In addition, HP-MR is sensitive to molecular changes (reported by the chemical shift) and is free of ionizing radiation (unlike the established molecular imaging methods PET or SPECT). Thus, HP-MR enables real-time tracking of metabolic pathways and distribution processes. None-NoneMoreover, HP-MR works for drugs and metabolites in their natural form, free of cumbersome radioactive labels that alter biological function. These unique features of HP-MR create new avenues for interrogating disease states, their aggressiveness, degree of progression, and response to treatment. None-NoneTo date, most biomedical HP-MR applications involve dissolution dynamic nuclear polarization (d-DNP). None-NoneHowever, d-DNP is associated with high costs and lengthy hyperpolarization times:P?70% polarization in 20 min under optimal conditions. NoneAn alternative, cost-effective, and continuous source of hyperpolarization is "Signal Amplification By Reversible Exchange" (SABRE), which uses parahydrogen (para-H2) as the source of spin order. NoneSABRE employs an organometallic catalyst that transiently binds bothpara-H2and target molecules, permitting the transfer of spin order frompara-H2to the target by matching the resonance frequency difference betweenpara-H2and protons on the target to the magnitude of through-bondJ-couplings. (Typically, the optimalB0is ?5-8 mT). NoneThe main limitation of SABRE is the requirement for transient binding on a catalyst which currently restricts the potential classes of molecules amenable to SABRE. Nevertheless, a number of pyridine derivatives (e.g., nicotinamide,Nonepyrazinamide, and isoniazid)Noneand DNA building blocks (e.g., adenine and adenosine)Nonehave been successfully hyperpolarized. Another significant limitation of SABRE is that it has been primarily used to hyperpolarize protons, which depolarize quickly (typically in seconds), making metabolic tracking on biologically relevant time scales challenging; direct detection of1H signals also competes with background signals from water. Heteronuclear spins like15N have lower sensitivity but are attractive because they have long polarization lifetimes, which in special cases can exceed 10 min. NoneSABRE-derived proton hyperpolarization has recently been transferred to13C, but, thus far, the associated efficiency remains low (P?0.03%)-a significant enhancement, but one that leaves room for improvement. NoneSuch recent improvements include "high-field SABRE" (via incoherent polarization transfer), which removes the need for sample transfer from the polarization region to the magnet for detectionNone(relying on incoherent polarization transfer in its first demonstration). This was improved again by enabling coherent transfer ofpara-H2polarization to targets at high field using rf irradiation and shown to work for1H as well as for15N.None-NoneHere we demonstrate direct production ofP?10% on15N by SABRE, exceeding all previous demonstrations by orders of magnitude. We use a field cycling strategy down to extremely low magnetic fields (?muT) known to transferpara-H2-derived hyperpolarization to heteronuclei in hydrogenativepara-H2induced polarization. None,None,None,None-NoneWe call the presented hyperpolarization strategy SABRE in SHield Enables Alignment Transfer to Heteronuclei (SABRE-SHEATH), which we demonstrate using15N-Py and15N-nicotinamide, but immediately extends to other15N enriched heterocyclic compounds. Py,None,Nonenicotinamide,Noneand othersNone,Nonecan be enriched with15N using simple chemistries that allow either direct heteroatom replacementNone,Noneor through ring opening and closureNoneusing15NH4ClNone-Noneas a cheap spin label source. As a result, the labor-intensive synthesis of complex15N-labeled biomolecules can be largely avoided for this class of heterocycles. Correspondingly, our theoretical analysis easily extends to other biologically relevant molecules already shown to be amenable to1H SABRE hyperpolarization. The presented experiments shine in their simplicity:para-H2is bubbled through a methanol-d4solution containing activated catalyst ([IrH2(15N-Py)3(IMes)]+) and15N-Py inside a mu-metal magnetic shield where the hyperpolarization is created; see Figure1A. Subsequently, the sample is transferred into an NMR magnet for detection after a 90 degrees pulse. The in-phase nature of the resulting signal is of particular importance for imaging applications, where the associated broader lines would suffer signal cancellations if the signals were antiphase. NoneSetup for the SABRE-SHEATH experiment. (A) shows the sample in an NMR tube held inside the mu-metal shield, wherepara-H2is bubbled through the solution. After hyperpolarization the sample is transferred into NMR spectrometer for detection. (B)para-H2and15N-pyridine (15N-Py) in exchange with [IrH2(15N-Py)3(IMes)]+. On the catalystpara-H2transfers its hyperpolarization to15N-Py through theJ-coupling network. The equatorial15N-Py (blue) is in fast exchange and responsible for the hyperpolarization of the free15N-Py (green). The simplest model for SABRE hyperpolarization uses the quantum mechanics of AA'BB' systems developed in 1957 by Pople et al. NoneSuch an AA'BB' spin system is formed in the catalytic intermediate [IrH2(15N-Py)3(IMes)]+, as illustrated in Figure1A. The AA'BB' system consists of thepara-H2protons (AA') and the15N-nuclei of the two Py (BB') in the equatorial plane. The spectral features of importance are the Larmor frequencies nuAof1H, nuBof15N, and the spin couplingsJAA,JBB,JAB=JA'B', andJAB'=JA'B. At specific magnetic fields different sets of energy levels of the AA'BB' system are brought very close to one another (they experience anticrossing),None,Nonethereby permitting efficient polarization transfer from the A-spins to the B-spins. Building on previous work discussing the importance of low fields for efficient polarization transfer frompara-H2to heteronuclei,None,None,None,None-NonetheSupporting Information(SI) provides a theoretical description of the polarization-transfer process. In theSIit is shown that the hyperpolarization process can be intuitively understood as simple rotations on a Blochsphere. This theoretical analysis shows that generally, Deltanu = nuA- nuBneeds to match one of the followingJ-terms:NoneNoneWhen Deltanu = +J1TorJ2Thyperpolarization aligned with the weak external magnetic field is created; reversing the direction of the magnetic field matches to the other state and reverses the direction of the induced magnetization. In eq1only Deltanu depends on the magnetic field, given asNoneNonewhereB0is the magnetic field in Tesla, gamma is the gyromagnetic ratio in MHz/T, and sigma is the chemical shielding (in relative units conventionally related to the chemical shift delta (in units of ppm) as delta = 106* (sigmaref- sigmasample), where sigmarefand sigmasampleare the chemical shielding values of the reference sample (i.e., TMS for1H NMR and liquid15NH3for15N) and the sample of interest. Combining eqs1and2provides the magnetic field for polarization transfer:NoneNoneIn the original (homonuclear) case for SABRE (gammaA= gammaB), the matching condition is only dependent on the chemical shielding difference Deltasigma = 10-6* Deltadelta) betweenpara-H2-derived hydrides, sigmaA, and Py protons sigmaB. In this case, the optimalB0is ?6.6 mT (i.e.,B0-transfer= 9 Hz/0.000032/42.6 MHz/T, assuming Deltadelta ?32 ppm andJT?9 Hz);Nonethis magnetic field corresponds to the conditions at which1H-SABRE is most efficient. None,None,None,NoneFor the heteronuclear case-of primary focus here-eq2gives a significantly different result: For15N/1H, an optimal transfer field ofB0-transfer?0.2-0.4 muT is predicted by eq3(assuming Deltagamma ?47 MHz/T), depending on the exact value ofJT; note Deltasigma is negligible given the large Deltagamma. However, this condition does not have to be precisely met, as it is limited by the residence times ofpara-H2and the substrate molecule (e.g., Py) on the Ir complex, which are typically on the time scale of ?0.1 s.NoneThis new target magnetic field is significantly lower than the Earth's magnetic field (?50 muT); thus,15N-SABRE experiments were conducted in a layer of mu-metal to shield the Earth's magnetic field. SABRE-SHEATH polarization is demonstrated by placing the NMR tube in a 305 mm-long magnetic shield (Lake Shore Cryotronics, P/N 4065) during ?30 s of bubbling. Note that no attempt was made to tune the small residual field to a precise value. After this ?30 s polarization period,para-H2delivery is stopped, and the NMR tube is quickly transferred (?4 s) to a 9.4 T NMR spectrometer to detect the SABRE-SHEATH polarization through conventional 1D-NMR. Both15N and1H pulse-acquire NMR experiments were conducted (seeSIfor further experimental details). Figure2highlights the main results: At concentrations of 4 mM15N-Py (and 0.24 mM catalyst), a 30,000-fold polarization enhancement over the thermal level is achieved (Figure2A). The thermal15N polarization at 9.4 T and room temperature is ?3.3 * 10-6, thus this enhancement corresponds to aP15N?10%. The results obtained with 63 mM15N-Py (6.3 mM catalyst, Figure2B) illustrate that with increasing concentrations, the absolute signal can be further increased, but the corresponding enhancement level (and the respectiveP) is diminished to 3000-fold (P? 1%). The reduced enhancements observed with increasing concentrations are limited by three factors: (i) the finite amount of dissolvedpara-H2limits the available hyperpolarization that can be passed to15N-Py molecules; (ii) the Ir catalyst and15N-Py concentrations modulate15N-Py residence time, which affects the efficiency of SABRE polarization transfer;Noneand (iii) the NHC Ir catalyst is a source ofT1relaxation. NoneOptimization of these three and other (e.g., temperature andpara-H2pressure) parameters may in principle lead to higher, even on the order of unity,15N hyperpolarization, which would be particularly important in the context of biomedical translation of this work. The spectral pattern observed for free15N-Py molecules in the SABRE-SHEATH experiments (Figures2A and B) is a clean, emissive in-phase triplet, as expected, because of the dominant two-bondJ-coupling between15N and theortho-Py-protons (2JNHis ?11 Hz). In the traditional low-field SABRE experiment (at ?6 mT)Noneoptimized for protons, the15N-triplet is typically characterized not only by lower enhancements but also by purely antiphase signatures, which can make such signals less useful in imaging applications because of partial signal cancellation from spectrally broadened lines. Single-shot15N NMR SABRE spectra. (A) SABRE-SHEATH experiment with Ir catalyst and15N-Py concentrations of 0.24 and 4 mM respectively result in 30,000-fold signal enhancement corresponding toP?10% with15NT1? 42 s at 9.4 T. (B) Shows that increase of Ir catalyst and15N-Py concentrations results in further increased NMR signals, but relative enhancement andPlevels decrease. An in-phase triplet split by 11 Hz is observed in both A and B. SABRE-SHEATH experiments (A, B) also reveal both bound15N-Py ligand site of the activated Ir catalyst. (C) NMR spectrum of neat 12.5 M15N-Py used for calibration. (D)15N-SABRE at conditions optimized for1H hyperpolarization (6 +/- 4 mT) results in antiphase triplets and lower enhancements. In the SABRE-SHEATH experiments (Figure2A,B), not only is the free15N-Py signal detected, but signals from the ligand-bound species are observed as well. The equatorial15N-Py molecules in the catalytic intermediate (blue) are those that exchange quickly and produce the observed hyperpolarization of the free15N-Py (green). The axial15N-Py (red) is also clearly visible in the SABRE-SHEATH experiments. This axial15N-Py is no longer detectable in the experiments optimized for1H SABRE (Figure2D), where antiphase lines result. NoneThe NMR lines of the catalyst-bound species are intrinsically broadened. Thus, the in-phase lines are still easily observable in SABRE-SHEATH experiments (Figure2A,B), however the experiments conducted at ?6 +/- 4 mT (Figure2D) exhibit antiphase lines with reduced enhancements. The presented theory predicts the observation of in-phase signals resulting from standardINone-magnetization in the SABRE-SHEATH experiments. We speculate that the antiphase signals in the 6 +/- 4 mT experiments arise because the initial singlet spin-order ofpara-H2is transferred not only intoINone-magnetization on protons but also into zero-quantum terms (e.g.,ZQNone=I1NoneI2None+I1NoneI2None) on pairs of Py-protons, which are finally transferred (by the2JNH-coupling ? INoneSNone) into antiphase terms between protons and15N (e.g.,I1NoneI2NoneSNone), thereby resulting in antiphase signals. Additional indication for the involvement of antiphase and zero-quantum terms are presented in the theSI. We also point out that polarization transfer strategies, e.g.,1H - greater than 15N via INEPT, are unlikely to be as effective as the direct15N-hyperpolarization in the SABRE-SHEATH because, as we demonstrate in theSI, standard proton SABRE is much less effective for15N-Py than on the natural abundant14N-Py. This method can also be applied to other biomolecular contrast agents with15N spin labels, such as15N-nicotinamide (vitamin B3amide);None,NoneFigure3A demonstrates an enhancement of epsilon ?20,000 (%P?7%) at 48 mM; a significantly higher concentration than that demonstrated for the greatest15N-Py enhancement and potentially suitable for biomedical applications. Future demonstrations will likely show SABRE-SHEATH to work with heterogeneous catalystsNoneand/or in aqueous mediaNone,Nonebringing this technique closer to its ultimate applications. (A)15N SABRE-SHEATH of a 48 mM sample of15N-nicotinamide (15N enrichment of ?66%) in methanol-d4using 2 mM of activated IMes catalyst. An enhancement epsilon of ?20,000-fold (corresponding to %P15N? 7%) was achieved in comparison to (B) a spectrum of thermally polarized sample of 12.5 M15N-Py (note the vertical axis is scaled by 50 fold). The spectrum of HP15N-nicotinamide shows the expected three resonances of free and bound species. SeeSIfor details. In conclusion, a simple and cost-effective hyperpolarization scheme to produce highPlevels on heteronuclei has greaterT1(P15N ?10% ) is developed by conducting SABRE experiments with a15N-labeled substrate in a magnetic shield. Despite the requirement for isotopic labeling, the heterocyclic compounds currently amenable to SABRE are well suited for inexpensive and straightforward enrichment strategies. The resulting hyperpolarization on heteronuclei, which are likely required for tracing hyperpolarized biomarkersin vivo. This technique can easily be extended to other biomolecules bearing15N in important Py derivatives, but it is to be expected that many other classes of molecules will be enabled given the rapid progress in the field, and SABRE-SHEATH will likely remain an advantageous method to polarize heteronuclei including15N and13C. Future applications span from biomolecular imaging, to the study of protein dynamics.