Studies of T cells in vaccines, autoimmunity and infection rely on the model that highly diverse TCRs recognize peptides bound to major histocompatibility complex (MHC) proteins. However, lipids presented by CD1 proteins expand the biochemical range of antigens for T cellsNone. T cells recognize foreign lipid antigens from major pathogens likeMycobacterium tuberculosis, indicating that microbial lipid recognition occurs during the natural history of infectious diseases. Also, because CD1 and MHC proteins differ greatly in their rates of polymorphism in human populations, comparison of MHC and CD1-reactive TCRs provides an experimental system to study the role of host genetics in shaping human TCR repertoires. Currently, understanding of the complexity of the overall T cell repertoire is dominated by knowledge of MHC-restricted T cells, which form highly complex patterns based on pairing of rearranged TCR alpha and beta chains that generate a unique TCR repertoire for each person. This diversity is generated through variable (V), diversity (D) and joining (J) segments, deletions and N-region additions. MHC class I and II proteins show corresponding complexity, as they are highly polymorphic in human populations, and any given protein sequence encoded at HLA-A, B, C, DR, DP, DQ loci can bind many peptides. In contrast, CD1 polymorphisms are rare and are usually functionally silentNone. Thus, genetic polymorphism, which represents one major driver of MHC-reactive TCR repertoire diversity, is largely absent in the human CD1 system. To some extent, the non-polymorphic nature of CD1 antigen presenting molecules plays out as an apparently simplified TCR repertoire. The main example is invariant natural killer T cells (iNKT cells), which express TRAV10 and TRAJ18 (previously known as Valpha24 and Jalpha18) and are found in most human donorsNone,None. However, most CD1-reactive T cells do not express this receptor. Other CD1d-reactive T cells (diverse NKT cells)None,Noneand all known T cells recognizing CD1a, CD1b or CD1c utilize differing TCR V, D or J segmentsNone-None. Accordingly, 'consensus' classifications of the CD1 repertoire recognize three T cell types: iNKT cells, diverse NKT cells and diverse T cells recognizing CD1a, CD1b and CD1cNone. CD1a, CD1b and CD1c, known as the group 1 CD1 proteins, are broadly retained during mammalian evolutionNone, and they activate large numbers of T cells present in the blood and tissues of humansNone,None. However, information about their biology and TCR diversity is extremely limited because no specific surface markers are known, and efficient methods to capture clones for TCR sequencing have not been developed. Taking advantage of CD1b tetramers as a new tool to study T cells in larger numbers, we identified highly stereotyped TCRs comprised of nearly identical TCR alpha chains. These TCR amino acid sequences derive from differing nucleotide sequences, showing that conserved TCRs arise through distinct rearrangement events within individual donors. Further, such TCRs are expressed on cell populations that are readily detectable among genetically unrelated donorsex vivo. These finding identify a previously unknown type of TCR-conserved alphabeta T cell type and point to inter-donor conservation of CD1b-reactive T cell responses. To study lipid-reactive T cells in a disease setting, we used lipid extracts ofMycobacterium tuberculosisto activate T cells from tuberculosis patients (Supplementary Fig. 1). By screening a panel of clones for responses to mycobacterial lipids and CD1b, we detected clone 18 (Fig. 1a). We identified the stimulating antigen as free mycolic acid (MA) (Fig. 1b), an essential long-chain mycobacterial lipid (Supplementary Fig. 2). Comparing its TCR alpha and beta chains to five previously known TCRs that recognize mycolyl lipids, we did not observe conservation of TCR sequence or V or J gene segment usage (Table 1)None,None,None-None. Thus, initial results based on conventional cloning methods supported the widespread view that TCRs in the group 1 CD1 system are diverse, similar to those of MHC-restricted T cellsNone,None,None,Noneand different from iNKT and mucosal-associated invariant T (MAIT) cells, which express highly conserved TCRsNone,None. However, existing dataNone,None,Nonemight inadequately represent the CD1b repertoire based on the small numbers of clones harvested to date and the need to extensively culture such clones to expand them. To bypass these problems and analyze T cells in theex vivosetting among patients immunized by natural infection, we generated CD1b tetramersNoneand loaded them with glucose monomycolate (GMM;Supplementary Fig. 2). This mycobacterial glycolipid antigen is producedin vivoduring infectionNoneand potently activates CD1b-reactive T cells in humans and cowsNone,None,None,None. We sorted Tet+T cells from three tuberculosis patients, cloned them at limiting dilution and screened for GMM-dependent functional response. Whereas Clone 18 and other T cell clones in the group 1 CD1 system were collected over many years (Table 1), tetramer binding to CD1b-reactive TCRs efficiently enriched for the relevant CD1b-reactive T cells, yielding multiple mycolyl lipid-reactive TCRs in all three patients studied (Fig. 2a). Thus, tetramer sorting represents an efficient method to sample the natural CD1b-GMM-reactive T cell repertoireex vivo, demonstrating the existence of mycolyl lipid reactive clones among genetically unrelated donors. In all cases, clones that produced IFN-gamma after GMM a ntigen stimulation also stained with GMM-loaded CD1b tetramers (Fig. 2). Based on staining intensity, the analyzed clones segregated into two groups detected with intermediate (Tetint) or high (Tethigh) staining. Tetintclones (clones 2, 26, 34, 71) showed diverse patterns of CD4 and CD8 expression, similar to clones generated by conventional methods (Table 1). In contrast, clone 18 and all Tethighclones (clones 1, 21, 42) expressed CD4 but not CD8 (Fig. 2aandFig. 3a). Both Tetintand Tethighcells were isolated from each patient, suggesting that the differing avidity patterns were not patient-specific, but instead existed as distinct cell types present side by side in individual patients. To gain insight into helper or effector functions of CD1b-reactive T cells we used a multiplex cytokine array to broadly profile cytokines produced by clones recognizing CD1b (1,2, 26, 34, 42) or control clones generated in the same way (101 and 50) (Fig. 2b). Our array design emphasized cytokines with defining roles in T helper cell function (TH1, TH17, TH2), such as interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma), IL-17 and IL-13. We also tested whether T cells produce two cytokines that are necessary for effective human anti-tubercular responsesin vivo, TNF and IFN-gammaNone,None. In all cases, short-term T cell cultures produced IFN-gamma and TNF, while helper cytokines like IL-2 and IL-17 were not consistently detected, suggesting an anti-microbial function of GMM-specific T cellsNone,None. As observed previously with clones cultured long-termin vitroNone,None, theseex vivostudies confirmed that IFN-gamma and TNF were reliably produced. Similar to clones generated by conventional methods (Table 1), Tetintclones showed differing TCR alpha genes. In contrast, all Tethighclones expressed TCRs that were highly similar to one another and the TCR expressed by clone 18 (Fig. 3a). The TCR alpha chains of the Tethighclones were identical in length and used the same variable (TRAV1-2) and joining (TRAJ9) segments, with few N region additions, yielding the CDR3 consensus sequence CAVRNTGGFKTIF (Fig. 3a). Because these similar rearrangements yielded largely germline-encoded TCR alpha chains and mediate recognition of mycolyl lipids, we designated these clones germline-encoded mycolyl lipid-reactive (GEM) T cells. Although lacking strict sequence conservation, TCR beta chains were apparently biased in variable region (TRBV) usage. TRBV6-2 and TRBV30 are expressed in 3.6 % and 1 % percent of human T cellsNone,None, yet were found in all of the original set of GEM clones (Fig. 2aandFig. 3). In addition to these clones from patients A22, C58, C52 and A14, single cell sequencing of Tet+cells from patients C40, C52, C58 returned three TRBV6-2, but no TRBV30 sequences (Supplementary Fig. 3). Thus, GEM T cells are characterized by nearly invariant TCR alpha chains and a TCR beta variable region gene bias, a pattern similar to iNKT cells and MAIT cells (Fig. 3b). Because strict TCR alpha conservation was seen only among Tethighclones, we hypothesized that high-affinity binding of GEM TCRs to CD1b-GMM mediates the expansion of GEM T cellsNone. Binding of any TCR to CD1b had not been previously measured, so we developed a plasmon resonance assay for binding of transmembrane region-truncated, disulfide-linkedNone. GEM TCRs to CD1b-GMM complexes. All three GEM TCRs showed dissociation constants (KD) near to the value of ~ 1 muM (Fig. 4). These values are at the high end of the range for TCRs recognizing natural peptide or lipid antigens, and they are comparable to measurements of human NKT TCRs binding to the superagonist alpha-galactosylceramide in complex with CD1dNone. Thus, the bright staining by CD1b tetramers for GEM clones (Fig. 2a) is explained by high affinity ternary interactions of alphabeta TCR heterodimers with CD1b-GMM complexes. Next we determined the role of GEM TCRs in T cell activation by transferring TCRs into TCR beta deficient JRT3-T3.5 cells. Untransfected cells were not activated by antigens, whereas expression of native GMM-reactive alpha and beta TCRs (clones 42, 21, 1) in JRT3-T3.5 cells conferred specific recognition of GMM, but not MA, in all cases. TCR alpha and beta chains from the MA-specific clone 18 reconstituted MA, but not GMM recognition (Fig. 5a). Thus, GEM TCRs are necessary for antigen-mediated activation, and the particular TCRs determine antigen fine specificity. To formally evaluate the relative contribution of TCR alpha and beta chains in antigen fine specificity, we transfected native, but mismatched, TCR alpha and beta pairs from clones 1, 18, 21 and 42 to create chimeric TCRs and measured responses to MA and GMM antigens. In all cases, transfectants responded to antigen or anti-CD3 stimulation, suggesting that the chimeric TCRs were expressed and signaled into cells. Because all GEM T cell clones use nearly identical TCR alpha sequences (Fig. 5a), we tested if TCR alpha chains play a dominant role in determining antigen specificity. Pairing of alpha chains from three GMM-recognizing TCRs (clones 1, 21, 42) with the beta chain from the MA-specific TCR (clone 18) reconstituted recognition of MA, but not GMM, in all cases (Fig. 5b). Thus, the TCR beta chain determined the fine specificity for two homologous antigens. Functional dominance of the beta chain was unexpected, given that TCR alpha chains were more conserved in structure among GEM T cells. A converse set of TCR chain swaps, in which the alpha chain of clone 18 was paired with beta chains from clones 1, 21 and 42, yielded three TCR chimeras, which did not respond to MA or GMM (Fig. 5c). Based on retained anti-CD3 response among transfectants, this result was not likely due to failure of transfection or signalling, but instead resulted from lack of antigen recognition by chimeric receptors. Thus, in contrast to preserved recognition of MA by chimeric TCRs (Fig. 5b), failure to recognize GMM in all chimeras suggested that the GMM glycolipid recognition was a more stringent interaction, dependent on both TCR chains. All four native TCR alpha chains (clones 1, 21, 42 and 18) are similar in sequence, but clone 18 differs only at position 107 from clone 42, with leucine substituted for arginine (Fig. 5a). Thus, position 107 in the CDR3 alpha sequence is crucial for determining MA antigen recognition. To address the structural basis of TCR alpha and beta pairing and gain general insights into the molecular basis of antigen specificity of GEM TCRs, we expressed TCRs from clone 18 and 42 and solved their crystal structures at 2.2 A resolution (Fig. 6a-candSupplementary Fig. 4). By superimposing these two GEM TCRs with a human MAIT TCRNone, we could compare three TCRs that share TRAV1-2 use, but differentially recognize CD1b and MA, CD1b and GMM, or MR1 and ribityl-lumazine antigensNone(Fig. 6d). Despite shared use of TRAV1-2, the MAIT and GEM TCRs differ in other aspects of their beta chain and CDR3alpha conformations (Fig. 6d), which presumably mediate their non-cross-reactive recognition of CD1b and MR1None,None. However, this comparison provided specific insights into GEM TCR pairing that agreed with results from TCR swaps. Although similar in structure, the two GEM TCRs showed notable differences at the CDR3alpha-CDR3beta interface, which derived from perturbations in the germline encoded CDR1alpha loop that arise mainly from the residue at position 107 in TCR beta (Fig. 6). Whereas arginine 107 in the CDR3beta of the MA-specific clone 18 packs against its CDR3alpha loop, the corresponding interaction is missing in the GMM-reactive clone, resulting in greater mobility in its CDR3alpha loop (Fig. 6d). This structural feature in the beta chain, which likely determines MA versus GMM reactivity, is located nearby to the important TCR alpha residue 107, identified in TCR chain swap experiments (Fig. 6d). Thus, these structural data point to a specific mechanism for beta chain influence on fine specificity, whereby the beta chain pushes laterally on the invariant alpha chain at a defined point on the CDRalpha-CDRbeta interface, analogous to fine-tuning NKT TCR specificityNone. In vitrostudies of clones identified key features of GEM T cells, such as high affinity TRAV1-2 TCRs and production of antimicrobial cytokines in response to mycobacterial lipids. To determine if GEM T cells are presentin vivoand share these properties, we tested fresh polyclonal T cells from blood bank donors or tuberculosis patients in three types of experiments (Supplemental Fig. 1). We first used a monoclonal antibody that recognizes TCR alpha chains with TRAV1-2 sequencesNoneto sort fresh PBMC into four populations based on TRAV1-2 and CD4 expression. CD1b- and GMM-reactive cells should fall in the TRAV1-2+CD4+gate, and the majority of MAIT cells are expected in the TRAV1-2+CD4-gateNone,None,None. Both TRAV1-2-populations should contain lymphocytes that should be CD1b-independent. TRAV1-2-CD4-cells from a blood bank donor (BB2) showed antigen-independent IFN-gamma responses, which might represent NK cell recognition of the MHC class Ilowtarget cell. The TRAV1-2-CD4+control populations from all donors failed to recognize GMM. In two blood bank donors (BB12 and BB2) and one tuberculosis patient (C58), IFN-gamma ELISPOT showed that TRAV1-2+CD4+populations were activated by GMM or MA in a CD1b-dependent manner. Thus, thein vitroanalysis of clones andex vivoanalysis of polyclonal T cells both agree that TRAV1-2 and CD4 expression are markers for a subset of cells in the repertoire that recognize CD1b and mycolyl lipids (Fig. 7aandSupplementary Fig. 1). Next we evaluated whether certain aspects of GEM T cell response initially observedin vitro, might also occur using more physiological APCs and apply to theex vivostate. GEM T cell activation by CD1b transfection of transformed cells (Fig. 2andFig. 7a) also occurred in autologous monocyte-derived dendritic cells, which more closely resemble the main cell population to express CD1b in the periphery (Supplementary Fig. 5a). Similar to results obtained with clones (Fig. 2b), polyclonal GEM T cell responses from patient C58 to GMM lead to IFN-gamma and TNF secretion when measured directlyex vivo(Supplementary Fig. 5b). Like clones, fresh TRAV1-2+CD4+T cell populations showed detectable reactivity to both MA and GMM antigens, but they produced higher IFN-gamma concentrations in response to GMM, suggesting that GMM is the immunodominant antigen (Figs. 1,7a). Ex vivoanalysis of GEM T cells from tuberculosis patients highlights differences among GEM T cells, NKT cells and MAIT cells. NKT cells were discovered and named in part based on their expression of CD161 and other NK markersNone, and almost all MAIT cells express CD161None. However, analysis of fresh CD1b Tethighcells in three donors showed varying rates of CD161 expression, with two donors expressing this marker at low frequency, similar to that of total CD3+cells (Supplementary Fig. 6a). NKT cells circulate in a pre-activated state and typically express the activation marker CD69None. Prolonged T cell activation by antigens might additionally lead to the expression of the T cell exhaustion marker PD1None. However, CD69 and PD1 were not expressed above background levels by TethighT cells in tuberculosis patients (Supplementary Fig. 6b-c). Overall, CD4 is a defining marker of GEM T cells that can further distinguish GEM T cells from most TRAV1-2+CD4-MAIT cellsNone. CD69, CD161 or PD1 do not specifically mark GEM T cell populationsex vivo. CD1b-reactive clones with diverse TRAV1-2-TCRs or conserved TRAV1-2+TCRs segregate into Tetintand Tethighcells, respectively. Both clone types were present in each patient tested. This pattern suggested that GEM T cells and lower affinity CD1b-restricted T cells might exist within the same repertoire of any patient. Polyclonal T cell analysis of patient C58 yielded a broad range of tetramer staining intensity, extending from low to very high absolute signal (Fig. 7b). Further, this pattern of varying tetramer staining intensity was detected among other tuberculosis patients (C12, C32, C60 A14, A21, A22) (Supplementary Fig. 6). Next, we directly tested the relationship between tetramer staining intensity and TRAV1-2 expression. Fresh CD3+T cells were analyzed for TRAV1-2+T cell frequency within Tetneg, Tetintand TethighT cell populations. Whereas anti-TRAV1-2 stains 1.8 % of T cells and 3.6 % of Tetintcells, TRAV1-2 was expressed on 71 % of Tethighcells (Fig. 7b). Thus, polyclonal T cells showed clear linkage of TRAV1-2 TCR expression with high-avidity binding to CD1b-GMM and indicated that GEM TCRs can dominate the high avidity repertoire. We sought to detect GEM T cells in a tetramer-independent manner by PCR. TRAV1-2 is joined to TRAJ9 in all GEM clones, but TRAV1-2 is expressed in concert with other joining regions in MAIT cells and MHC-restricted T cells. We designed primers for TCR constant regions as a normalization control and primers that bind on both sides of the TRAV1-2-TRAJ9 junction. Standard PCR detected the GEM defining junction in Tet+, but not Tet-T cells from two tuberculosis patients (C58, A14) (Fig. 7c). Sequencing of the amplified rearrangements yielded new TCR alpha chain sequences that fit the TCR alpha sequence motif for GEM T cells (Fig. 3a). For example, rearrangements amplified from patient A14 contained a TCR alpha chain sequence identical to clone 1, which was also derived from patient A14, and two unique genetic rearrangements with 0 or 3 N nucleotides (Fig. 3a). Also, the rearrangements amplified from patient C58 were identical to the TCR alpha chain of clone 42, which was also derived from this subject. Furthermore, the same TCR alpha and beta chain were identified more than once during single cell sequencing experiments (Supplementary Fig. 3). Isolation of identical TCR sequences from independent experiments using different blood samples from the same subject strongly suggests expansion of GEM clonesin vivo. Mycolyl lipids are foreign mycobacterial antigens that drive expansion of antigen-specific T cells during infectionNone,None,None,None,None. After detecting GEM T cells in tuberculosis patientsNone, we sought to determine if they also exist in the naive repertoire. Sorted TRAV1-2+CD4+T cells from two blood bank donors (BB2 and BB12) yielded detectable GMM- and CD1b-dependent responses (Fig. 7a,Supplementary Fig. 1). Based on this initial result, we quantitatively analyzed GEM-defining TCR sequences using real-time PCR (RT-PCR) and high-throughput sequencing. RT-PCRon TRAV1-2+CD4+sorted cells from two blood bank donors, BB36 and BB38, and four tuberculosis patients (C28, C34, C52, C58) detected the TRAV1-2-TRAJ9 junction in all subjects tested but signals were significantly higher among the tuberculosis patients (Fig. 7d). These findings are consistent with the presence of a small GEM T cell population in the naive repertoire and expansion after tuberculosis infection. However, not every possible TRAV1-2-TRAJ9 junction corresponds to a GEM T cell sequence. To determine if the candidate GEM TCR alpha chains detected in blood bank donors actually met the length and sequence criteria for GEM T cells, we performed deep sequencing of the TCR alpha chains of the sorted TRAV1-2+CD4+cells from donors BB36 and BB38 (Fig. 7d,Supplementary Fig. 7). Among 7,282 (BB36) and 6,861 (BB38) productive TRAV1-2 sequences analyzed, 0.48 % and 0.90 % encoded CAVRXTGGFKTIF or CAVLXTGGFKTIF, where X is any amino acid (Fig. 3,Supplementary Fig. 7). All eight clones identified used limited N region additions. Although deep sequencing did not provide information on the TCR beta chain, the TCR alpha sequences proved that T cells bearing the defining GEM TCR alpha motif could be detected at low frequencies in the bloodstream of blood donors. These data identify GEM T cells as one of three known TCR-conserved cell types in humans. GEM T cells, iNKT cells and MAIT cells show strict TCR alpha sequence conservation with biased selection of TCR beta chains. Further, GEM T cells and MAIT cells are defined by the same TCR a variable region gene. TRAV1-2 is located at the most upstream position in the TRA-TRD locus, suggesting possibly shared mechanisms of TCR rearrangement or target binding to CD1b and MR1. However, clear differences in TCR structure and phenotype distinguish these three cell types. These data show that GEM T cells differ from MAIT cells in their CD4 expression, J segment usage, antigen binding surfaces and antigen specificityNone,None. Contrasting with iNKT cells, GEM T cells have apparently lower baseline autoreactivity, lower precursor frequencies in the blood, low CD69 expression, suggesting that they are more dependent on infection to drive expansionNone. CD1b and CD1d differ in expression in the periphery, with CD1b expression largely restricted to DCs versus broad expression of CD1d on gastrointestinal epithelia, macrophages and B cellsNone. Whereas iNKT cells are preactivated by self antigens and have a patrolling functions mediated by autoreactivity, these features point to a role for GEM T cells in the host response to infection. We propose a model of the CD1b repertoire with at least two compartments: high affinity conserved TCRs and low affinity diverse TCRs. Because high affinity antigen recognition is linked to invariant TCR sequences, multiple TRAV1-2/TRAJ9 rearrangements create TCRs that likely drive expansion of GEM T cells through high affinity interactions with CD1b-lipid. Amino acid and nucleotide patterns suggest two mechanisms of expansion. First, identical TCR alpha and beta chain nucleotide sequences were derived from different blood samples or culture wells from the same donors, suggesting that GEM T cells undergo clonal expansionin vivoprior to phlebotomy. Second, most sequences are distinct in ways that prove that GEM T cell populations in the blood derive from many independent TCR arrangement events. For example, three rearrangements with differing underlying nucleotide sequences give rise to identical CDR3 alpha amino acid sequences in donor BB36. Also, highly similar CDR3 alpha amino acid sequences in clones 1, 18, 21 and 42 derive from differing patterns of exonucleolytic trimming of the V and J regions. Autoreactivity to CD1b was not observed, and any self antigen that could support the thymic selection of GEM T cells is unknown. Therefore, the basis for emergence of GEM T cells among donors without known mycobacterial infection remains unexplained. However, it is possible that environmental or self antigens cause GEM T cell expansion in a way that is comparable to the recently described MHC-restricted, HIV-specific T cells in unexposed donorsNone. Current views emphasizing the diversity of group 1 CD1-reactive TCRs derive from small panels of T cell clonesNone-None. We initially viewed clone 18 as further evidence of TCR diversity in the CD1b repertoire, but it was actually the prototype for a larger T cell population cells later identified in many unrelated donors. Based on reliability of higher throughput tetramer methods and the non-polymorphic nature of human CD1 molecules, we predict that inter-donor TCR conservation in the CD1 repertoire is more common than is currently appreciated. This hypothesis can be addressed through analysis of many clones using newly generated of human CD1a, CD1bNoneand CD1cNonetetramers. Inter-donor CDR3 diversity is the dominant pattern for MHC-restricted TCRs, with the notable exception of public TCRs detected in donors that share an MHC allele and specific antigenic exposureNone. The GEM TCR could be considered a kind of public TCR that recognizes CD1b. CD1b is expressed in an identical form in essentially all humans, which is not the case for even the most common MHC allele. In the MHC system, public TCRs are proposed to arise via convergent recombination, a process whereby multiple recombination events with few N nucleotide additions produce differing nucleotide sequences that encode the same amino acid sequenceNone. GEM TCR alpha chain sequences display these hallmarks. Inter-donor TCR conservation might be of practical use in tracking of CD1-restricted T cells or possibly TCR-based immunodiagnosis. In the MHC system, particular TCR sequences do not normally predict the antigens recognized by genetically unrelated donors. Even the conserved iNKT TCR does not correspond to any single antigen of known biological function. Here we show that the GEM TCR alpha chain sequence is associated with recognition of lipids produced by a defined genus of pathogenic bacteria. Thus, CD1b tetramers, PCR primers or monoclonal antibodies for the GEM TCR alpha chain might now be evaluated as TCR-based tests for tuberculosis. GEM T cells are a plausible target for vaccination with mycobacterial lipids. C32 GMM was purified fromR. equiand C80 GMM was purified fromM. phleias describedNone. MA was obtained from Sigma. M. tuberculosislipid extract was prepared by extracting a pellet of 7H9 grown H37Rv with choroform/methanol 1:2 (V:V) for two hours at room temperature, followed by chloroform/methanol 2:1. Glycerol monomycolate was purified from lipid extract fromM. bovisBCG grown in Sauton'smedium, followed by loading on a silica column and elution with chloroform. CD1b monomers (NIH tetramer facility) were loaded withR. equi-derived GMM and assembled into tetramersNone. Tetramers were incubated for 30 minutes at room temperature prior to adding monoclonal antibodies for an additional 30 minutes on ice. Flow cytometry data were pre-gated for lymphocytes based on forward and side scatter. Antibodies are detailed inTable 1Cells were sorted on an 11-color FACSAria (Becton Dickinson). Blood was obtained after informed consent from asymptomatic tuberculin positive subjects clinically assessed to have latent tuberculosis but with no clinical or radiographic evidence of active tuberculosis, from a patient with smear-positive pulmonary tuberculosis, and from blood bank donors, as approved by the institutional review boards of the Lemuel Shattuck Hospital and Partners Healthcare. Sorted GMM-loaded Tet+19T cells were stored overnight in medium containing 0.2 ng/ml IL-15 and plated the next day at 1 cells/well in round bottom 96-well plates containing 2 *105irradiated allogeneic peripheral blood mononuclear cells, 4 *104irradiated Epstein-Barr virus transformed B cells, 30 ng/ml anti CD3 antibody OKT3 and 1 ng/ml of IL-2 which was added on day 2 of the culture. Alternatively, PBMC were stimulated with autologous monocyte-derived DC and 1 mug/ml total lipid extract ofM. tuberculosis, and IFN-gamma secreting cells isolated (Miltenyi Biotech) and cloned. After 3 weeks, the wells with visible growth were restimulated. Clones were tested for binding of GMM loaded tetramer by flow cytometry and for antigen specificity in an ELISPOT assay. For ELISPOT assays, cocultures of APCs and T cell were incubated for 16 h in a Multiscreen-IP filter plate (96 wells; Millipore) coated according to the manufacturer's instructions (Mabtech). Antibodies are detailed in theonline methods. From expanding T cell clones and sorted T cell populations, RNA was isolated with an RNeasy kit (Qiagen), and cDNA was synthesized with a Quantitect reverse transcription kit (Qiagen), including a genomic DNA-removal step. V segment usage was determined by PCR using primerset IPS000029 and IPS000030 as described atwww.imgt.orgin combination with TCR alpha constant region reverse primer 5' GTGGTAGCAGCTTTCACCTCCTTGG 3' and TCR beta constant region reverse primer 5' GGTGGCAGACAGGACCCCTTGC 3'. Taq polymerase was used in the supplied buffer (Denville) under the following cycling conditions: an initial denaturation of 5 min. at 95 degrees C, followed by 35 cycles of 1 min. at 94 degrees C, 1 min. at 59 degrees C, 1 min. at 72 degrees C, followed by a final elongation step of 7 min. at 72 degrees C. For detection of TCRs using TRAJ9, a V segment specific forward primer was used in combination with TRAJ9 reverse primer 5' GGTTCTGGATATTTGCTTTAACAAATAG 3'. For the cloning of the full length TCR alpha and beta chains of clones 1, 18, 21, and 42 (Genbank accession numbers JQ778257-JQ778264) the following primers were used: FL_TRAV1-2_For_NheI: CTAGCTAGCGCAGCAGATGTGGGGAGTTTTCCTTC; FL_TRBV6-2_For_NotI: CTAGCGGCCGCCCTGCCATGAGCCTCGGGC; FL_TRBV30_For_NotI: CTAGCGGCCGCGGCTTGGATGATGCTCTGCTCTC; FL_TRAC_Rev_XhoI: CAGCTCGAGCAATCTTAATCATAAATTCGGGTAGGATCCCATC; FL_TRBC2_Rev_BamHI: TATGGATCCGGAGCTAGCCTCTGGAATCCTTTC. TCR alpha and beta chains were cloned into pREP7 and pREP9 vectors, electroporated into JRT3-T3.5 cells and grown in medium containing 1.5 mg/ml Geneticin (Gibco) and 0.5 mg/ml hygromycin B (Invitrogen) for 4-6 weeks. Recognition of mycolyl lipids by transfectants was tested in an IL-2 ELISPOT assay in the presence of monocyte derived dendritic cells and 10 ng/ml phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate. For single cell TCR sequencing cells were sorted in wells of a PCR plate containing 2.5 mul cDNA synthesis reaction mix consisting of 0.1 % Triton X-100 (Sigma-Aldrich) and 0.2 mul iScript reverse transcriptase in 1x iScript reaction buffer, and incubated 25 degrees C for 5 minutes, 42 degrees C for 30 minutes, and 85 degrees C for 5 minutes. Subsequently, a pre-amplification targeting TRAV1-2 and all TRBV segments was performed in GoTaq Flexi (Promega) reaction mixture containing 2.5 mM MgCl, 0.2 mM each dNTP, 0.025 U/mul GoTaq polymerase, 0.14 muM each of 26 TRBV-specific forward primers, 0.25 muM of constant beta reverse primer 5' GGTGGCAGACAGGACCCCTTGC 3', 0.125 muM of TRAV1-2 specific forward primer 5' GCAACATGCTGGCGAAGCACCCAC 3', and 0.125 muM of constant alpha reverse primer 5' GTGGTAGCAGCTTTCACCTCCTTGG 3', under the following cycling conditions: an initial denaturation of 2 min. at 95 degrees C, followed by 25 cycles of 30 sec. at 95 degrees C, 1 min. at 59 degrees C, 1 min. at 72 degrees C, followed by a final elongation step of 5 min. at 72 degrees C. The pre-amplification mixture was diluted to a total volume of 75 mul, and 5 mul was used in a RT-PCR reaction to determine TRAV1-2 message with 0.25 muM each of an internal TRAV1-2 primer 5'TCCTTAGTCGGTCTAAAGGGTACAG 3' and internal constant alpha reverse primer 5'CATCAGAATCCTTACTTTGTGACACATTTG 3'using the Sybr green (BioRad) methodNone. The TRAV1-2 PCR product of positive wells was isolated and sequenced and aliquots of the pre-amplified cDNA was amplified in individual PCR reactions with the V beta specific forward primers and the constant beta reverse primer 5' ACACAGCGACCTCGGGTGGG 3'. Positive reactions were detected by agarose gel electrophoresis, and the amplicons were sequenced. Relative quantity of the TRAV1-2-TRAJ9 junction was determined relative to constant alpha chain message using the TaqMan (Applied Biosystems) method using the following primers and probes: TRAV1-2 forward primer: 5'TCCTTAGTCGGTCTAAAGGGTACAG 3'; TRAJ9 reverse primer: 5'TTGCTTTAACAAATAGTCTTGTTCCTGCTCC 3'; TRAV1-2 probe: 5' FAM-CTCCAGATGAAAGACTCTGCCTCTTACCTCTGTGC-BHQ 3'; constant alpha forward primer: 5'CTGACCCTGCCGTGTACCAG 3'; constant alpha reverse primer: 5' CATCAGAATCCTTACTTTGTGACACATTTG 3'; constant alpha probe: 5'FAM-CCAGTGACAAGTCTGTCTGCCTATTCACCGATTTTG-BHQ 3'. For deep sequencing of TRAV1-2 alpha chains, V segment-specific linear amplification and next-generation sequencing was performed as described previouslyNone,None. Soluble TCR proteins were expressed and purified as describedNoneand floated in increasing concentrations over GMM-loaded CD1b coupled to research-grade streptavidin-coated chips in a Biacore 3000. The final response was calculated by subtraction of the response of the unloaded CD1b. BIAevaluation version 3.1 software (Biacore AB) was used to fit the data to the 1:1 Langmuir binding model and the equilibrium data were analyzed with the Prism program for biostatistics, curve fitting and scientific graphing (GraphPad). Clone42 TCR crystals were grown by the vapour-diffusion method at 20 degrees C with a protein/reservoir drop ratio 1:1 at a concentration 5mg/ml in 20 % PEG 3350, 0.05M Na-HEPES pH 7 and 1 % tryptone w/v. Clone18 TCR crystals were grown using the same technique with 25 % PEG1500 and 10 % Proprionate-cacodylate-bis tris propane pH7. TCR crystals were soaked in a cryoprotectant solution containing mother liquor solution with the PEG concentration increased to 25 % and then flash frozen in liquid nitrogen. Data were collected on the Micro-focus beamline (MX2) at the Australian Synchrotron with an ADSC-Q315r CCD detector at 100K. Data were processed as described previouslyNonefollowed by maximum-likelihood refinement with the Buster programNone. The structures were determined by molecular replacement using the ELS4 TCR as modelNonewith the PHSER program. Manual building was conducted with the COOT software followed by maximum-likelihood refinement with the Buster program. The final models were validated using the Protein Data Base validation website, and the final refinement statistics are summarized inFigure S4. The coordinates are available under the accession number: 4G8E for the clone18 TCR and 4G8F for the clone 42 TCR.