Chiral amines are attractive targets for enantioselective methodology due to their prominent representation amongst bioactive molecules and chiral catalysts. NoneParticularly attractive are alpha-amino acids, which are utilized directly as building blocks for pharmaceuticals, natural products, agrochemicals, and as precursors for commonly employed chiral ligands. NoneSeveral methods exist that provide access to enantioenriched, protected amines. NoneThe use of dialkyl azodicarboxylates as masked electrophilic nitrogen sources in auxiliary-directed,NoneorganocatalyticNoneand transition metal catalyzedNoneamination reactions is prevalent. These methodologies furnish highly enantioenriched hydrazines that can be converted to amines after multiple chemical operations. We hypothesized that the use of aryldiazonium cations as electrophilic nitrogen sources within a chiral anion phase-transfer (CAPT) manifold could provide a complementary enantioselective amination method. NoneIn this scenario, chiral anion phase-transfer of an insoluble aryldiazonium cation would generate a soluble N-electrophilic, chiral diazonium ion pair. This species could react with nucleophilic carbonyl derivatives to provide enantioenriched alpha-diazenated compounds (Fig. 1a and b). Importantly, this methodology would complement established alpha-amination methodologies in several ways. Firstly, well-established methods for reductive cleavage of azo compounds such as2would provide facile access to unprotected alpha-amino acid derivatives (3). NoneSecondly, straightforward preparation of complex aryldiazonium cations from readily available anilines would facilitate development of application-specific amination reagents with tunable reactivity. NoneThis manuscript details the successful execution of this hypothesis through the first examples of catalytic, enantioselective alpha-amination using aryldiazonium cations. This advance is enabled by the preparation of BINAM-derived chiral phosphoric acids (BDPAs) that proved critical to obtaining high levels of enantioinduction. As a model system, we were attracted to indanone-derived beta-ketoesters due to their potential for elaboration into conformationally constrained tyrosine analogues (CCTAs) such as 5-hydroxy-2-aminoindan-2-carboxylic acid (Hai) (4),Nonespirohydantoin-derived CGRP antagonists investigated for treatment of migraine headaches (5),Noneand amino-indane natural products such as dihydroparfumidineNone(6) (Fig. 1c). We initially found that exposure of beta-ketoester17to TCyP (7), Na3PO4, and PhN2BF4provided diazene18with excellent conversion, albeit with low enantioselectivity (Table 1). NoneNoneConditions:17(1 equiv. ), cat. (13-16) (5 mol%), base (6 equiv. ), PhN2BF4(1.2 equiv. ), solvent (0.025 M), rt, 2-24 h.NoneConversion based on consumption of starting material as determined by1H NMR. NoneDetermined by chiral phase HPLC. With this encouraging result in hand, a screen of CAPT catalysts and inorganic bases was undertaken (Table 1). Examination of the commonly employed chiral phosphate scaffolds did not identify a catalyst capable of providing improved enantioselectivity (entries 1-6); however, linear screening carried out with TCyP (7) proved fruitful, as use of weaker bases, such as NaH2PO4, increased enantioselectivity to 34% ee while maintaining excellent conversion (entry 7, 8). Challenged by low levels of enantioselectivity using common chiral phosphate scaffolds, we undertook efforts to design novel CAPT catalysts. We were drawn to the BINAM-derived phosphoric acids (BDPAs,Table 1,13-16) first prepared by Ishihara and coworkers,Noneas they offer two potential improvements over BINOL-derived phosphates (7-11): first, we hypothesized that the nitrogen lone pairs would improve hydrogen-bonding interactions with the substrates relative to traditional chiral phosphoric acid catalysts (7-12). NoneSecond, increased resonance donation from the nitrogens could improve ion-pairing with the diazonium cation. Furthermore, this catalyst system would be highly modular, allowing for variation of both the ionic character and the hydrogen-bonding strengthviasynthetic modulation of the N-aryl groups. NoneA small library of BDPAs was prepared (13-16). Upon examination of these catalysts under our diazenation conditions (Table 1, entries 9-12), we were pleased to find that electron-poor BDPA16provided the diazenated product (18) in excellent conversion and 87% ee (entry 12). Fine-tuning of solvent (entries 13-15) identified cyclohexane as optimal, yielding indanone18in 90% ee (entry 8). With optimized reaction conditions in hand, we investigated the scope of this reactivity. Indanones with electron-rich (20,21,24,Table 2) and electron-poor (19,22,23) substitution at the -4, -5, and -6 positions provided their corresponding diazenes in good yields and enantioselectivities. Importantly, both protected phenol and halogenated derivatives (20and22-24) were competent under the reaction conditions, permitting derivatization of the reaction products. Additionally, substitution of the diazonium aryl group with electron-poor, as well as electron-rich, groups at -ortho, -meta, and -paraposition provided excellent yields and good to excellent enantioselectivities (Table 2,25-32). NoneConditions: nucleophile (1 equiv. ),16(10 mol%), NaH2PO4(6 equiv. ), ArN2BF4(1.2 equiv. ), cyclohexane (0.025 M). NoneConditions: nucleophile (1 equiv. ),17(10 mol%), NaH2PO4(6 equiv. ), ArN2BF4(1.2 equiv. ), MTBE (0.025 M). NoneIsolated yield. NoneEnantiomeric excess determined by chiral phase HPLC. Additional ketone derivatives were amenable to CAPT diazenation with slight modification of the reaction conditions (Scheme 1). Benzosuberone derivative33was a suitable nucleophile, affording diazene34in 96% ee and 78% yield. Use of beta-ketoamide35provided diazene36in 90% ee and 91% yield. We were pleased to find that nonstabilized enamide37underwent enantioselective C-N bond formation, providing imine38in 80% ee and 59% yield. We were pleased to find that hydrogenation of indanone18and benzosuberone34under standard conditions smoothly formed their respective beta-hydroxy amino acid derivatives with excellent diastereoselectivity and without loss of enantioenrichment (Scheme 2,39and40). Additionally, compound24was reduced to protected CCTA41, a synthetic precursor of Hai (4) using standard heterogeneous Pd/C conditions followed by homogeneous reduction with polymethylhydrosiloxane (PHMS) and PdCl2(Scheme 2c). NoneImportantly, enantioenriched compounds akin to amine41(Scheme 1c) have been previously preparedviaclassical resolution in 9 steps. NoneFurthermore, as CCTAs such as Hai (4) are utilized for study of protein conformation,Nonewe envisioned that15N-labeling would be of great utility, and a powerful application of our methodology. Towards this end, isotopically enriched amino indanone42was prepared in a three-step sequence from inexpensive Na15NO2. It is noteworthy that the use of an azodicarboxylate electrophile for this application would require two equivalents of isotopically enriched nitrogen. In closing, we have developed a method for the enantioselective alpha-diazenation of enolate derivatives. This work was enabled by the development of novel BDPAs. The presented methodology possesses a broad scope, allowing for diazenation of diverse nucleophiles. As an application of our methodology, several diazenes were directly reduced to provide amino acid derivatives. Furthermore, facile15N-labeling was demonstrated through preparation of protected amino acid42.