Transcriptional enhancers encode patterns of gene expression by binding transcription factor proteins that recognize specific sequences within enhancers and enhancers often integrate the combined activity of multiple transcription factorsNone. Transcriptional enhancers can be located close to or up to hundreds of kilobase pairs from their respective gene promotersNone. Alteration in enhancers underlie development, evolution, and diseaseNoneand, in many eukaryotic genomes, more DNA may encode transcriptional enhancers than encodes proteinsNone. Despite the importance of transcriptional enhancers, we currently understand far less about the structure and function of enhancer regions than we do about protein coding regions. Our understanding of enhancer structure and function is derived mainly from reporter gene assays, wherein putative enhancer DNA is coupled to a heterologous promoter and reporter. Reporter gene assays have provided most of our current knowledge of enhancer structure and function. These studies indicate that transcriptional regulation of some, but not all, eukaryotic genes is modulated by multiple enhancers that act independentlyNone. Despite the insight that has been provided by reporter gene assays, these experiments suffer from several limitations. First, reporter constructs often drive incomplete and/or ectopic patterns of expressionNone, probably because enhancers are tested away from their native genomic context. Second, reporter constructs rarely drive expression at normal levels, which confounds quantitative studies of gene regulation. Third, some studies have failed to identify modular autonomous enhancers that recapitulate components of the complete expression patternNone,None,None. Publication bias probably has resulted in under-reporting of genes that appear to lack modular enhancersNone. To provide a method complementary to classical reporter-gene assays, we exploited Transcription Activator-Like Element (TALE) DNA-binding proteins to target transcriptional repressor and activator protein domains to specific genomic locations. TALEs can be engineered to target specific DNA sequencesNone,Noneand TALE DNA-binding domains fused to activators and repressors and targeted specifically to promoters can modulate gene expression in plantsNone,Noneand in human cell-cultureNone-None. In the present paper we demonstrate that TALEs can be targeted to enhancers to modulate specific domains of complex expression patterns. We engineered GAL4 responsive vectors forDrosophila melanogastertransgenesis that allow fusion of a TALE DNA-binding domain to regulatory domainsNone(Fig. 1a,Supplementary Fig. 1, andSupplementary Text 1). In each of these fusion genes the native activator domain of the TALE C-terminus was removed. We tested the Kruppel and Hairy repression domains in TALE-mediated repressors (TALERs) and the VP64 (four tandem copies of VP16) activation domain in TALE-mediated activators (TALEAs). Estimates of repressor activity from reporter-gene assays suggest that Kruppel can repress enhancers within approximately 100 bp of a DNA binding siteNone, whereas Hairy can reportedly silence enhancers up to 5 kb from a DNA binding siteNone,None. As a proof of principle, we targeted the well-studied enhancers of the geneeven-skipped(eve), which encodes a transcriptional repressor required for correct segmentation and neuronal developmentNone-None. Evetranscripts appear first in the blastoderm embryo and expression resolves rapidly into seven transverse stripes along the anterior-posterior axis (seeFig. 1). Separate enhancers drive subsets of these stripes (Fig 1b), apparently autonomouslyNone,None. To determine the efficiency of TALERs in the embryo, we drove ubiquitous, zygotic expression of a TALER-Hairy targeted near theevepromoter (Fig. 1b). This TALER-Hairy reduced expression of allevestripes (Fig. 1) and resulted in abnormal expression of engrailed (en), a target of EveNone(cf. Fig. 1). Larval cuticles of these embryos exhibited fused segments (Fig. 1). To test whether the residualeveexpression in these embryos resulted from late onset of TALER expression relative toeveactivation, we drove this TALER-Hairy with a maternally-expressed driverNone. In these embryos,eveexpression was almost undetectable (Supplementary Fig. 2),enexpression was disrupted severely (Fig. 1), and outward signs of segmentation in the larval cuticle were lost (Fig. 1). These results are consistent with the effects ofeven-skippedhypomorphic allelesNone. We also drove this TALER-Hairy using neurogenic GAL4 drivers, and, in all cases, we observed decreased Eve levels in neurons (Supplementary Fig. 3). As a control, a TALE-GFP fusion protein targeted to the same site did not altereveexpression (Supplementary Fig. 4). Promoter-targeted TALERs thus provide a complementary tool to existing conditional gene silencing technologies inDrosophilaNone. In addition, judicious use of GAL4 drivers may be used to allow TALERs to mimic an allelic series. We examined next, whether TALEs could be used to selectively activate gene expression. To confirm the efficiency of the activator fusion, we drove ubiquitous, zygotic expression of a TALEA targeted near theevepromoter. Strikingly, these embryos exhibited stronger and broader patterns of expression of all seven stripes of Eve, compared to wild type (Fig. 2). While we observed low levels of Eve expression between the canonical stripes, there is still a clear 7-striped pattern of expression. Engrailed expression was disrupted in these embryos (Fig. 2), as expectedNone. Given the efficiency of TALE-mediated transcriptional repression, we tested whether TALERs could regulate specific transcriptional enhancers. We generated TALEs that targeted each of the five stripe-specific enhancers and the autoregulatory element ofeve. It has been hypothesized that the regulatory autonomy of individual enhancers results from the action of short-range repressors, such asKruppelNone. It is also possible that the genomic context ofeveenhancers allows enhancers to act independently. As a partial test of these alternative hypotheses-and to identify the most useful reagents-in separate experiments we drove ubiquitous expression of a TALER-Kruppel and a TALER-Hairy targeted to a 16 bp sequence within theevestripe 2 enhancerNone,None. Both TALERs repressedevestripe 2 expression specifically, and the TALER-Hairy generated stronger repression than did the TALER-Kruppel (Fig. 3). We observed no notable changes in the levels of expression of otherevestripes (Fig. 3), even though the enhancer for stripes three and seven is located only 1.6 kb upstream from the targeted binding site (Fig. 1). These embryos lost a single stripe ofengrailedexpression (Fig. 3), which is consistent with theengrailedphenotype produced by a deletion ofevestripe 2None. Furthermore, these embryos failed to hatch and larval cuticles exhibited an altered gnathal segment (Fig. 3), as expectedNone. As a control, ubiquitous expression of a TALEGFP fusion protein targeted to the same 16 bp sequence inevestripe 2 did not altereveexpression (Fig. 3). All together, these results suggest that both Kruppel and Hairy can generate local repression of an enhancer in its native genomic location, although Hairy appears to drive stronger repression than does Kruppel. We therefore used TALER-Hairy fusion proteins for all other repression experiments. Ubiquitous expression of TALER-Hairy fusion proteins targeting each of the remainingevestripe enhancers (Fig. 4a) caused reduced expression primarily of those stripes corresponding to the previously reported expression domain of each enhancer (Fig. 4b-dandSupplementary Fig. 5). In multiple cases, TALER-Hairy repressed stripes ofeveare expressed in fewer cell rows, consistent with previous observations thateveenhancers are sensitive to repressor concentrationsNone. A TALER-Hairy targeted to the minimal autoregulatory sequence (MAS), located approximately 5 kb upstream of theevepromoter, caused strong reduction in expression of allevestripes after embryonic stage 5, as expectedNone(Supplementary Fig. 6). We found that a TALER-Hairy construct targeting the stripe 4/6 enhancer caused a slight reduction also inevestripe 5 expression (Fig. 4c). However, TALERs targeting two different binding sites within the 4/6 enhancer produced similar patterns of repression of stripes four and six (Supplementary Fig. 5), while only one of these TALERs reduced expression of stripe 5. While this is an interesting observation, we cannot rule out the possibility that repression of stripe 5 by one TALER represents an experimental artifact. Each TALER-Hairy construct generated precise and predicted patterns of disruption ofenand phenotypic effects in larval cuticles (Supplementary Fig. 7). We observed no evidence for 'long-range' repression by the TALER-Hairy constructs, suggesting that, in a native genomic context, Hairy may function at a more limited range, or with greater specificity, than suggested previouslyNone. The precise spatial and temporal domains of enhancer activity are believed to result, primarily, from the activity of repressors that limit the activity of more broadly expressed activatorsNone. While the quantitative level of activators is clearly important for determining the final level of gene expressionNone, it is thought that most activators are unable to overcome the limiting effects of repressorsNone. If this is true, then targeting an additional activator to an enhancer should influence gene expression only, or mainly, in an expression domain that is already active. We tested this idea by targeting TALEAs to multipleeveenhancers. Ubiquitously expressed TALEAs targeted to the stripe 3/7, stripe 4/6, and stripe 5eveenhancers each caused an increase in the level of expression specifically in the stripe driven by the native enhancer (Fig. 4e-g). In several cases, the targetedevestripe was expressed in more cell rows than in wild-type embryos. In two cases, TALEAs influenced primarily one stripe of an enhancer that was previously reported to regulate two stripes; the TALEA targeting the stripe 3/7 enhancer mainly increased stripe 3 expression and the TALEA targeting the 4/6 enhancer mainly increased stripe 4 expression (Fig. 4h and 4j). There are several possible explanations for these observations. First, while these composite enhancers cannot be divided cleanly by reporter assays into fragments that drive separate stripes, the regulatory information encoded in these enhancers may be sufficiently spatially segregated that a TALEA can influence mainly one stripe. Alternatively, the VP64 activator may be less efficient at activating some enhancers, depending on interactions with other repressive and activating factors occupying a given enhancer. Each of the TALEAs we tested resulted in the fusion ofenstripes that flanked the alteredevestripes (Fig. 5a-d). Remarkably, adult flies developed from embryos treated with all three TALEAs: TALEA stripe 4/6 adults displayed reduced abdominal segments one and six (compareFig. 5e and Fig. 5f); TALEA stripe 3/7-adults displayed fusion of the T2 and T3 segments, including loss of a pair of legs, and reduced abdominal segment seven (Fig. 5g); and TALEA stripe 5 adults exhibited a reduced abdominal segment five (Fig. 5h). These results also reinforce that although we observed weak activation ofevestripes 7 and 6 (see above), these manipulations were sufficient to disrupt normal development of these body regions. All together, these observations indicate that ubiquitously expressed TALEs fused to a repressor or an activator and targeted to single regulatory elements can generate specific effects. As a further test of the specificity of the TALEs, we compared the effect of the TALER-Hairy targeted toevestripe 2 on a syntheticD. melanogaster evestripe 2 construct and the homologousD. pseudoobscura evestripe 2 construct, which differs by 3 bp from theD. melanogasterconstruct at the target sequence (Supplementary Fig. 8). When the TALER-Hairy was expressed ubiquitously, we observed lower expression of theD. melanogasterreporter gene, but no change in expression of theD. pseudoobscurareporter geneNone(Supplementary Fig. 8), suggesting that this TALE, at least, displays high specificity for its target site. These results indicate that individual regulatory elements in the genome can be targetedin situwith single transcriptional repressors or activators using TALEs. We were surprised that a single TALE could provide robust repression and we hypothesize that the protein-DNA interaction for TALEs is more specific than binding observed for metazoan transcription factors, which seem to have evolved relatively low specificity protein-DNA interactions to enable cooperative and synergistic bindingNone. The relatively local effects of the enhancer-TALER-hairyconstructs that we observed are inconsistent with previous reports of long-range repression byhairyNone. We suggest two hypotheses to explain this discrepancy. First, enhancers may bind proteins-either directly by DNA-protein interactions or indirectly through protein-protein interactions-that prevent interactions between neighboring enhancers. If DNA regions responsible for this hypothetical "antisocial" behavior of enhancers do not promote transcription on their own, then these DNA regions may have been trimmed from "minimal" enhancer fragments that have been used widely in classical reporter gene assays. Second, the DNA between transcriptional enhancers may encode boundary elements that limit the spread of repressor activity. This second hypothesis is consistent with the observation that deleting DNA outside of the "minimal"eveS2 leads to decreased transcriptional robustnessNone. Perhaps the most interesting finding is that none of the ubiquitously expressed TALEAs disrupt all seven stripes ofeveexpression or drive expression in other ectopic locations. Even the TALEA targeted to the promoter drives increased expression mainly in the seven-stripe region. There are several distinct possibilities for these results. First, TALEAs may bind to their respective targets in all embryonic cells, but their activating signals may be overridden by repressive cues. Alternatively, the TALEA binding sites may be inaccessible to TALEA binding in cells where the enhancers are not normally active. This second hypothesis is consistent with the view that chromatin accessibility is responsible for directing the widespread patterns ofDrosophilatranscription factor bindingNone,None. Our results strongly support a model for combinatorial activation of independent, modularDrosophila eveenhancersNone,None,None. The precise effects of the TALEAs supports the view that repression acts in a dominant fashion on transcriptional activatorsNone,None. Because TALERs and TALEAs provide experimental access specifically to active enhancers, they may allow functional dissection of non-modular enhancer architectures that have confounded reporter gene assays. TALE constructs were based on the JFRC-7 vectorNoneand modified for use with the Golden-Gate methodNoneby mutating all Esp3I sites. TALE-C terminus fusion proteins were synthesized by GeneScript and subcloned into JFRC-7 at the XhoI/XbaI sites, removing the mCD8 and GFP domains. The following domains were added in separate constructs: GFPNone; Kr repression domain, amino acids 402-502;hairyrepression domain 255-337, VP64 activation domainNone. Plasmids will be deposited at AddGene (www.addgene.org). TALE target sites were identified using the TAL Effector-Nucleotide Targeter, TALE-NTNone. TALEs were subsequently assembled using the Golden-Gate methodNone. Drosophila melanogasterstrains were maintained under standard laboratory conditions. Transgenic TALE constructs were created by Rainbow Transgenic Flies Inc., and were integrated at the attP2-landing site. The following GAL4 drivers were used: Actin5C-GAL4; NGT40None(Bloomington stock 4442); and rhomboid-GAL4, (Bloomington stock 26871). For each respective GAL4 line, virgins were collected and crossed with male, TALE-bearing lines. Embryos were raised at 28 degrees C and collected, and fixed according to standard protocols. Antibody staining was carried out according to standard procedures. Briefly, primary antibodies obtained from the Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank were used to detect Eve (3C10 used 1:20) and En (4D9 used 1:20) proteins, followed by detection of primary antibodies using secondary antibodies labeled with Alexa Fluor dyes (used 1:500, Invitrogen). Cuticle preps were performed using standard protocols. Confocal images were obtained on a Leica DM5500 Q Microscope, using an ACS APO 20*/0.60 IMM CORR lens, with Leica Microsystems LAS AP software. Sum projections of confocal stacks were assembled, embryos were scaled to match sizes, background was subtracted using 50 pixel rolling ball radius, and plot profiles of fluorescence intensity were analyzed using ImageJ software (rsb.info.nih.gov/ij/). Data from the plot profiles were further analyzed in Matlab.