During the last few decades, transition metal catalysts utilizing precious metals (i.e. Pd, Pt, Rh, Ir, Au, Ru) combined with NHC ligands have been successfully developed and employed for a variety of catalytic transformations including metathesis, C-H activation, hydrogenation and C-C bond formation reactions amongst many others. None-NoneWhile the coordination chemistry and catalysis of late transition metal-NHC complexes have been widely explored, the development and application of iron-NHCs has only recently begun to be widely investigated despite the fact that iron-NHC complexes have been known since the early 1970's. None-NoneWithin the last decade, numerous reports of iron-NHC complexes with unique structures and novel catalytic applications have been reported. None-NoneA wide variety of applications of iron-NHC complexes to catalytic transformations have begun to emerge, including applications in hydrosilylation, carbometallation, cyclization, aziridination and allylic substitution reactions, demonstrating the significant catalytic potential of iron-NHC complexes. None-NoneOf particular note, the combination of simple iron salts and NHCs results in thein situgeneration of catalytically active iron-NHC species for C-C cross-coupling reactions including aryl-aryl, alkyl-aryl and alkyl-alkyl couplings (Scheme 1). NHC ligands have been particularly successful for iron cross-coupling as the aryl-aryl system is currently the best performing iron-based system for heteroaryl coupling and the alkyl-alkyl system is currently the only iron-based cross-coupling system capable of C(sp3)-C(sp3) couplings in the presence of functional groups. Within the catalytic applications of iron-NHCs, the nature of the specific NHC ligand that provides for the most effective catalysis varies significantly from one system to another. For example, the optimal NHC for aryl-aryl cross-coupling catalysis is SIPr where the corresponding, unsaturated IPr ligand was found to be much less effective (Scheme 1). NoneBy contrast, for the cross-coupling of non-activated chloroalkanes and aryl Grignards in Kumada-type couplings, the inverse of the NHC dependence on activity is observed with IPr outperforming SIPr. NoneHowever, these dramatic disparities in reactivity due to differences in NHC backbone saturation are not observed in alkyl-alkyl cross-coupling where similar product yields can be obtained using either IMes or SIMes. NoneIn the aryl-alkyl cross-coupling system of Bedford and co-workers, NHCs lackingN-aryl substituents (Cy,tBu) outperformed IMes. NoneCombined, these studies suggest that the NHC ring structure (i.e. saturatedvs.unsaturatedvs.substituted) and N-substitution may yield important differences in iron-NHC bonding,in situiron-NHC speciation and, hence, iron-NHC reactivity. Despite the observed dependence of catalytic performance on the NHC ligand structure, a detailed understanding of iron-NHC sigma- and pi-bonding and the effects of NHC ring perturbations on iron-NHC bonding is critically underdeveloped. In fact, detailed investigations of iron-NHC bonding have been limited to piano stool type iron(ii) complexes with both cyclopentadienyl (Cp) and CO ligation where a combination of IR, electrochemical and theoretical methods suggested that the NHC ligand in these complexes can serve as both a sigma-donor and moderate pi-acceptor. NoneHowever, fundamental insight into iron-NHC bonding in more electron deficient, high-spin iron complexes is lacking. This deficiency stands in stark contrast to precious metal NHC systems where IR studies of supporting CO ligands and DFT investigations have led to the general view of NHC ligands as strong sigma-donors (stronger than phosphine ligands) and weak pi-acceptors, where the extent of pi-bonding is dependent on the nature of the metal and supporting ligands. None-NoneWhile the general views of metal-NHC bonding from the precious metal systems currently drive much of the work in iron-NHC systems, rational catalyst development with iron-NHCs necessitates a fundamental understanding of the effects of NHC variations on electronic structure and bonding in paramagnetic iron systems that may be catalytically relevant. Such studies can also provide fundamental insight into the differences in electronic structures of iron-NHC and iron-phosphine complexes lacking CO ligation that may be relevant to catalysis, including iron-catalyzed cross-coupling. Importantly, iron-NHC bonding in high-spin systems may differ significantly compared to the low-spin, Cp and CO bound species more commonly investigated. Towards this goal, an approach combining magnetic circular dichroism (MCD) studies and density functional theory (DFT) investigations of well-defined iron(ii)-NHC complexes has been utilized to directly investigate electronic structure and bonding in high-spin iron(ii)-NHC complexes. The results provide direct insight into the ligand-field strength of NHC ligands compared to amine and phosphine ligands, the effects of NHC ring variations on bonding and the extent of donation and back donation contributions to bonding in iron(ii)-NHC complexes as a function of coordination number and geometry. All reagents were purchased from commercial sources and used as received. Air and moisture sensitive manipulations were carried out in an MBraun inert-atmosphere (N2) dry box equipped with a direct liquid nitrogen inlet line or in an MBraun inert-atmosphere (Ar) dry box. All anhydrous solvents were further dried using activated alumina/4 A molecular sieves and stored under inert-atmosphere over molecular sieves. (PPh3)2FeCl2, (PMe3)2FeCl2, (tmpn)FeCl2and (teeda)FeCl2were prepared following previously reported methods. None-None(IMes)2FeCl2, (IPr)Fe(CH2TMS)2, and (SIPr)Fe(CH2TMS)2were prepared according to published procedures or slight modifications thereof. None,NoneRelated procedures for the synthesis of (ClIMes)2FeCl2and (ClIPr)Fe(CH2TMS)2appear in the ESI. NoneAll solid samples for57Fe Mossbauer spectroscopy were run on non-enriched samples of the as-isolated complexes. All samples were prepared in an inert atmosphere glove box equipped with a liquid nitrogen fill port to enable sample freezing to 77 K within the glove box. Each sample was loaded into a Delrin Mossbauer sample cup for measurements and loaded under liquid nitrogen. Low temperature57Fe Mossbauer measurements were performed using a See Co. MS4 Mossbauer spectrometer integrated with a Janis SVT-400 He/N2cryostat for measurements at 80 K with a 0.07 T applied magnetic field. Isomer shifts were determined relative to alpha-Fe at 298 K. All Mossbauer spectra were fit using the program WMoss (SeeCo). All samples for MCD spectroscopy were prepared in an inert atmosphere glove box equipped with a liquid nitrogen fill port to enable sample freezing to 77 K within the glove box. MCD samples were prepared in 6 : 1 (v/v) toluene-d8 : benzene-d6(to form low temperature optical glasses) in copper cells fitted with quartz disks and a 3 mm gasket. Low temperature MCD experiments were conducted using two Jasco spectropolarimeters. Both instruments utilize a modified sample compartment incorporating focusing optics and an Oxford Instruments SM4000-7T superconducting magnet/cryostat. This set-up permits measurements from 1.6 K to 290 K with magnetic fields up to 7 T. A calibrated Cernox sensor directly inserted in the copper sample holder is used to measure the temperature at the sample to +/-0.001 K. UV-visible (UV-vis) MCD spectra were collected using a Jasco J-715 spectropolarimeter and a shielded S-20 photomultiplier tube. Near-infrared (NIR) MCD spectra were collected using a Jasco J-730 spectropolarimeter with a liquid nitrogen cooled InSb detector. The spectral range accessible with this NIR MCD setup is 2000-600 nm. All MCD spectra were baseline-corrected against zero-field scans. VTVH-MCD spectra were analyzed using previously reported fitting procedures. NoneFor VTVH-MCD fitting, both negative and positive zero-field splitting models were evaluated. The reported error bars were determinedviaevaluation of the effects of systematic variations of the fit parameters on the quality of the overall fit. Dand |E/D| values are obtained directly from the fit parameters using the relationshipsE= (delta/6) + 1/3[(delta2/2) +deltaEs]1/2and -D=E+ (Es/3) - (delta/6) forS= 2 as previously described. NoneSpin unrestricted DFT calculations were performed with the Gaussian 09 package. NoneAll geometry optimization calculations were performed with the B3LYP exchange-correlation functionalNone,Nonewith the TZVPNonebasis set on all atoms and inclusion of solvation effects using the Polarized Continuum Model (PCM) with toluene as the solvent. NoneThe dispersion correction of Grimme (GD3) combined with the damping function of Becke and Johnson (BJ) was used in geometry optimizations of all four-coordinate complexes. NoneThe geometries of all complexes were fully optimized starting from X-ray crystal structures (when available) with initial optimization performed with cep-4g before optimizing at the TZVP level. All optimized geometries had frequencies found to be positive. Further calculations of molecular orbitals (MOs) and TD-DFT used the B3LYP functional with the TZVP basis set on all atoms. MO compositions and analyses were calculated using the AOMix program. None,NoneAtomic charges and spin densities were calculated using Mulliken population analysis (MPA). Orbitals from the Gaussian calculations were plotted with the ChemCraft program. TD-DFT was used to calculate the electronic transition energies and intensities of the 30-40 lowest-energy states. The analysis of the MO compositions in terms of fragment orbitals, Mayer bond orders, total overlap populations and the charge decomposition analysis (CDA)None,Nonewere performed using AOMix-FO. NoneCDA and its applications have been previously described in detail by Gorelsky and co-workers. None,NoneInitial studies focused on (IMes)2FeCl2as a representative example of distorted tetrahedral (NHC)2FeX2complexes which have been widely explored synthetically and as potential iron(ii) pre-catalysts for a variety of reactions (Scheme 2). The 80 K57Fe Mossbauer spectrum of polycrystalline (IMes)2FeCl2(Fig. 1A) is well-fit as a single iron species withdelta= 0.80 mm s-1and DeltaEQ= 2.12 mm s-1, where the observed isomer shift falls within the expected range for high-spin iron(ii),S= 2 distorted tetrahedral species. NoneThe 5 K, 7 T NIR MCD spectrum of (IMes)2FeCl2contains two low-energy ligand-field (LF) transitions at 5440 cm-1and 6520 cm-1(10Dq(Td) = 5980 cm-1) (Fig. 1B). For a tetrahedralS= 2 iron(ii) complex, only the5E - greater than 5T2transition is spin allowed. For the distorted tetrahedral environment as is present in (IMes)2FeCl2, the degeneracy of both the ground and excited states is removed, resulting in two LF transitions as observed by MCD spectroscopy. The saturation magnetization behavior for (IMes)2FeCl2collected at 5917 cm-1is well-described by aS= 2 negative zero-field split (-ZFS) non-Kramers doublet model with ground-state spin-Hamiltonian parameters ofdelta= 2.8 +/- 0.2 cm-1andg? = 8.5 +/- 0.2 withD= -11 +/- 1 cm-1and |E/D| = 0.30 +/- 0.02 (Fig. 1B, inset). The 5 K, 7 T UV-vis MCD spectrum of (IMes)2FeCl2contains multiple charge transfer (CT) transitions in the 30 000-35 000 cm-1region (Fig. 1C) which are assigned and discussed using TD-DFT calculations in the ESI. NoneSpin unrestricted DFT calculations were used to further analyze the electronic structure of (IMes)2FeCl2. Geometry optimization with B3LYP/TZVP and the GD3BJ dispersion correction yielded overall structural features, bond lengths and angles in good agreement with those observed by crystallography (Table 1). The optimized (IMes)2FeCl2complex is best described as a distorted tetrahedral complex with Fe-IMes bond lengths of 2.161 A and 2.163 A, Fe-Cl bond lengths of 2.334 A, a C(IMes)-Fe-C(IMes) bond angle of 126.36 degrees and a Cl-Fe-Cl bond angle of 107.45 degrees . This optimized geometry correlates well with the literature structure, which has Fe-IMes bond lengths of 2.139 A and 2.157 A, Fe-Cl bond lengths of 2.310 A and 2.292 A, a C(IMes)-Fe-C(IMes) bond angle of 125.20 degrees and a Cl-Fe-Cl bond angle of 106.66 degrees . Both the experimental and computational studies of (IMes)2FeCl2are indicative of a high-spin iron(ii) complex (S= 2). The molecular orbitals and their corresponding energies as well as electronic transition energies were calculated from the optimized structure. The electronic ground state of (IMes)2FeCl2is described by the frontier molecular orbitals (FMOs) with focus on the unoccupied MOs, in conjunction with their occupied counterparts, to showcase the major contributions to bonding. The MOs and the corresponding energy diagram are shown inFig. 2. In the beta manifold, the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) along with the unoccupied orbitals beta-193, beta-194, beta-195, and beta-208 are comprised mostly of Fe d contributions, slightly mixed with NHC and Cl orbital contributions. The Fe 3d orbitals listed in order of increasing energy are dNoneNone-NoneNone(beta-192), dNoneNone(beta-193), dNone(beta-194), dNone(beta-195), dNone(beta-208). In addition, there are FMOs that represent an occupied MO of both IMes (with backbone contributions) and Cl character (beta-185), an occupied MO of Mes (NHC side chains) and Cl character (beta-187), and an unoccupied MO with some d character as well as a sigma bond with IMes (beta-200). Charge decomposition (CDA), fragment molecular orbital (FO) and Mayer bond order (MBO) analyses were completed for the (IMes)2FeCl2complex. The MOs of a complex can be described as linear combinations of the occupied and unoccupied MOs of defined molecular fragments, termed fragment molecular orbitals or FOs. In CDA, donation and back donation between different molecular fragments can be evaluated based on the overlap and coefficients of the MO-LCFO matrix (where LCFO = linear combination of fragment molecular orbitals). In the case of (IMes)2FeCl2, CDA was completed to quantify the total charge donation and back donation between the Fe-Cl2fragment and two IMes ligand fragments (i.e. 3 total fragments). When the Fe-Cl2fragment and IMes ligand fragments are combined to form the complex, there is a mixing of the occupied fragment orbital of the donor with the unoccupied fragment orbital of the acceptor which allows for the transfer of electron density (charge donation) from the donor to the acceptor. From the CDA, it can be seen that there is a total charge donation (IMes2- greater than Fe-Cl2) of 0.954 electrons and total back donation (Fe-Cl2- greater than IMes2) of 0.391 electrons. This results in a net charge donation to Fe-Cl2of 0.563 electrons. The FO analysis provides information about changes in occupancies of the fragment molecular orbitals of the donor and acceptor upon the complex formation so that the orbitals involved in the donation and back donation can be readily identified (i.e. the specific orbitals that change their occupancies). In the alpha manifold, the charge donation from the IMes ligand fragments to the Fe-Cl2fragment occurs from the highest occupied fragment orbital (HOFO) of the IMes fragments, an IMes sigma orbital, to two unoccupied fragment orbitals on the Fe-Cl2fragment of iron 4s and 4p character (20% occupancy change per NHC ligand, seeFig. 3). A slightly larger occupancy change is observed for charge donation in the beta manifold (22% per NHC ligand), where donation occurs again from the HOFO (IMes sigma orbital) of the IMes fragments to several unoccupied FOs of the Fe-Cl2fragment that have significant iron d character. In the beta manifold, there is also a significant electronic polarization, particularly in the Fe-Cl2fragment, which allows for a redistribution of charge from an occupied Fe-Cl2fragment orbital with mostly d character to unoccupied fragment orbitals of the Fe-Cl2fragment (seeFig. 3). Furthermore, the FO analysis indicates the presence of back donation in both the alpha and beta manifolds from occupied Fe-Cl2fragment orbitals to unoccupied IMes fragment orbitals (i.e. ?9.6% and ?10.1% occupancy changes for each IMes fragment in both the alpha and beta manifolds, respectively). However, in contrast to the donation in this system, the occupancy changes corresponding to back donation are spread over many occupied Fe-Cl2and unoccupied IMes FOs. For this distorted tetrahedral complex, the Mayer bond order (MBO) between Fe and each IMes is 0.760 and 0.767. In both cases, the beta contribution to the bond order is greater than that of the alpha, 0.390 and 0.393 for beta and 0.370 and 0.374 for alpha. When compared to the occupied alpha-spin MOs, the occupied beta-spin MOs contribute more to the overall bond order due to a small increase in sigma donation from the NHCs to the unoccupied beta-spin orbitals on Fe. A series of distorted tetrahedral iron(ii) complexes containing two chloride ligands and two additional ligands (e.g. diamine, two monodentate phosphines or NHCs) were investigated by NIR MCD spectroscopy in order to evaluate the relative LF strength of NHC ligands in distorted tetrahedral iron(ii) complexes. Such an evaluation is important as it has been previously suggested that NHCs may be stronger field ligands than phosphines and, hence, may be able to serve as alternatives for phosphines in the development of iron-based catalysts. None,None,None,None,None,NoneThe 5 K, 7 T NIR MCD spectra of the L2FeCl2complexes investigated are given inFig. 4and the d-d transition energies and 10Dq(Td) values are summarized inTable 2. The diamine-iron(ii)-dichloride complex (tmpn)FeCl2(tmpn =N,N,N',N'-tetramethylpropane-1,3-diamine) contains very low energy LF transitions at 5260 and 6140 cm-1(10Dq(Td) = 5700 cm-1). Similarly, (teeda)FeCl2(teeda =N,N,N',N'-tetraethylethylenediamine) gives LF transitions at 5290 and 6310 cm-1(10Dq(Td) = 5800 cm-1). Both NHC ligated tetrahedra gave slightly higher energy LF bands, where (ClIMes)2FeCl2exhibited LF transitions at 5520 cm-1and 6540 cm-1(10Dq(Td) = 6030 cm-1), similar to those observed for (IMes)2FeCl2(10Dq(Td) = 5980 cm-1). The phosphine-iron(ii)-dichloride complexes yielded the highest energy ligand-field transitions, with (PPh3)2FeCl2exhibiting LF bands at 5590 cm-1and 7590 cm-1(10Dq(Td) = 6590 cm-1) and (PMe3)2FeCl2at 6340 cm-1and 7600 cm-1(10Dq(Td) = 6970 cm-1). In contrast to the NHC and diamine complexes, both phosphine species exhibit a pseudo-Aterm in their LF MCD transitions, where such pseudo-Aterms in MCD (i.e. a pair of temperature-dependent C-terms with opposite sign) arise from spin orbit coupling (SOC) between two excited states that are close in energy to which two orthogonal transitions occur from a single ground state. None-NoneWhile the physical origin of the pseudo-Aterm is currently elusive in the phosphine complexes as it requires a detailed understanding of the SOC mechanism, it is noteworthy that previous MCD studies of distorted tetrahedral bisphosphine complexes have also exhibited pseudo-Aterm LF transitionsNoneand the generality and origin of this behavior for tetrahedral phosphine complexes will be a focus of future study. To obtain further insight into iron(ii)-NHC bonding compared to phosphine and amine ligands, CDA and MBO analyses were completed for the L2FeCl2complexes. The MBO between Fe and the NHCs in (IMes)2FeCl2is the highest of the series (seeTable 3). Notably, the MBOs between Fe and PPh3or PMe3are slightly smaller. Lower still are the MBOs for the Fe-diamine bonds in (tmpn)FeCl2and (teeda)FeCl2, 0.362 and 0.362 for (tmpn)FeCl2and 0.352 and 0.336 for (teeda)FeCl2. However, the MBO between Fe and Cl is much higher in both the phosphine and diamine complexes when compared to the NHC complex. This is indicative of a strongtrans-type influence of the NHC ligand that causes a pronounced weakening of the Fe-Cl bond. This influence can be seen experimentally in the (IMes)2FeCl2crystal structure where the Fe-Cl bonds are elongated (avg Fe-Cl = 2.30 A) in comparison to the analogous bisphosphine (avg Fe-Cl = 2.23 A) and diamine (avg Fe-Cl = 2.26 A) complexes (seeTable 1). The calculated total overlap population (TOP) between the Fe and Cl moieties in (IMes)2FeCl2(avg Fe-Cl = 0.39) is significantly lower than those calculated for the bisphosphine and diamine complexes (avg Fe-Cl = 0.49 and 0.50, respectively). The amount of electron density between the Fe and Cl atoms in each complex displays an inverse relationship with the amount of electron density donated by each L-type ligand (Table 3). This correlation suggests that the strongest donor to the distorted tetrahedral Fe(ii) center will cause the most pronounced weakening of the Fe-Cl bond. This rationalization using TOP values is consistent with the perturbation approach of Burdett and Albright,Nonewhich shows that systems of lowered symmetry can, through orbital mixing, exhibit metal-ligand bond weakening effects similar to thetransinfluence typically seen in square-planar and octahedral complexes. The results of the CDA show that the complex with the highest net charge donation to the Fe-Cl2fragment from the L-type ligand fragments is (IMes)2FeCl2with a net charge donation of 0.563 electrons, followed by the two phosphine complexes, (PMe3)2FeCl2and (PPh3)2FeCl2, with total net charge donations of 0.493 and 0.472 electrons, respectively. The diamine complexes, (tmpn)FeCl2and (teeda)FeCl2, have comparatively lower total net charge donations of 0.275 and 0.250 electrons, respectively. In addition, there is significant back donation in (IMes)2FeCl2, 0.391 electrons, as well as (PMe3)2FeCl2and (PPh3)2FeCl2, 0.222 and 0.294 electrons, respectively. To further evaluate the effects of NHC backbone substitutions on iron(ii)-NHC complex electronic structure and bonding as a function of coordination number and geometry, a series of three-coordinate (3C) (NHC)Fe(CH2TMS)2complexes were studied which vary only in the nature of the NHC backbone (saturated (SIPr), unsaturated (IPr) and unsaturated/chlorinated (ClIPr)) (Scheme 3). The 80 K57Fe Mossbauer spectrum of solid (IPr)Fe(CH2TMS)2(ESI, Fig. S3None) is well-fit as a single iron species withdelta= 0.34 mm s-1and DeltaEQ= 1.04 mm s-1. The 80 K Mossbauer spectra of solid (SIPr)Fe(CH2TMS)2and (ClIPr)Fe(CH2TMS)2(see ESI, Fig. S3None) are very similar to (IPr)Fe(CH2TMS)2(delta= 0.35 mm s-1, DeltaEQ= 1.12 mm s-1anddelta= 0.33 mm s-1, DeltaEQ= 1.08 mm s-1, respectively). The observed isomer shifts for these 3C species are somewhat lower than previously observed for 3C high-spin iron(ii) complexes (delta= 0.51 mm s-1for (aIPr)Fe{N(SiMe3)2}2,None0.59 mm s-1for [Li(15-crown-5)][Fe{N(SiMe3)2}3],None0.48 mm s-1and 0.74 mm s-1for CH3-and Cl-ligated iron(ii)-beta-diketiminates). NoneThe NIR MCD spectrum of (IPr)Fe(CH2TMS)2contains two LF transitions at 6660 cm-1and 9260 cm-1(Fig. 5A). The saturation magnetization behavior for (IPr)Fe(CH2TMS)2collected at 9852 cm-1is well-described by aS= 2 -ZFS non-Kramers doublet model with ground-state spin-Hamiltonian parameters ofdelta= 2.1 +/- 0.2 cm-1andgll= 9.9 +/- 0.2 withD= -20 +/- 2 cm-1and |E/D| = 0.20 +/- 0.02 (Fig. 5A, inset). The observedDvalue is similar to those previously determined for (IPr)Fe{N(SiMe3)2}2(D= -18.2 cm-1) and (IMes)Fe{N(SiMe3)2}2(D= -23.3 cm-1) by Layfield and co-workers. NoneThe 5 K, 7 T NIR MCD spectra of (SIPr)Fe(CH2TMS)2(Fig. 5B) and (ClIPr)Fe(CH2TMS)2(Fig. 5C) yielded similar LF transitions and ZFS parameters to (IPr)Fe(CH2TMS)2(Table 4). Thus, NIR MCD spectroscopy supports the presence of similar electronic structures in the 3C (NHC)Fe(CH2TMS)2complexes. Lastly, UV-vis MCD spectra of the three complexes indicate small differences in the CT transitions (see ESINone). Spin unrestricted DFT calculations were used to further analyze the electronic structures of (IPr)Fe(CH2TMS)2, (SIPr)Fe(CH2TMS)2, and (ClIPr)Fe(CH2TMS)2. Geometry optimizations with B3LYP/TZVP yielded overall structural features, bond lengths and angles in good agreement with those observed by crystallography (Table 5; note that no crystal structure is available for (ClIPr)Fe(CH2TMS)2). Both experimental and computational studies of the series of 3C NHC complexes are indicative of high-spin iron(ii) complexes (S= 2). Details of the MO analyses are given in the ESI. NoneImportantly, CDA and MBO analyses were completed for the series of 3C Fe(ii) NHC complexes (Table 6). From the CDA, it can be seen that the total donation from the NHC fragment to the Fe-(CH2TMS)2fragment is the highest for (IPr)Fe(CH2TMS)2, suggesting that this complex is the strongest sigma-donor of the series, followed by (SIPr)Fe(CH2TMS)2, and (ClIPr)Fe(CH2TMS)2(seeTable 6). While it can also be seen that (SIPr)Fe(CH2TMS)2has the highest back donation of the series, the overall back donation to the NHC fragment (average = 0.076 electrons) for all three complexes is small when compared to the total donation to the Fe-(CH2TMS)2fragment (average = 0.444 electrons). For (IPr)Fe(CH2TMS)2, the MBO between Fe and IPr is 0.667, with alpha and beta contributions of 0.341 and 0.326, respectively. Similarly, the MBO between Fe and the NHC for (SIPr)Fe(CH2TMS)2and (ClIPr)Fe(CH2TMS)2are 0.664 and 0.625, respectively. The small disparities in the sigma donation abilities of the NHC ligands in the 3C complexes derive from slightly different MBOs of the Fe-C(NHC) bonds and the C(NHC)-N(NHC) bonds. In (SIPr)Fe(CH2TMS)2, the C(NHC)-N(NHC) bonds are relatively strong (average MBO = 1.168) which weakens the Fe-C(NHC) bond, thereby making it a poorer sigma donor. The C(NHC)-N(NHC) bond in (IPr)Fe(CH2TMS)2is weaker than that of the SIPr complex (average MBO = 1.130), consequently causing a stronger Fe-C(NHC) bond and making the IPr complex an overall better sigma donor. Overall, while slight differences in iron-NHC bonding are present as a function of the NHC backbone structure, both experimental and theoretical studies indicate that these differences are relatively small in this series of three-coordinate iron(ii) complexes. In contrast to previous proposals that backbone substituents can greatly affect bonding interactions in Fe-NHC complexes,Nonethis result is consistent with our studies of 4C complexes where the electronic structure effects of IMesvs.ClIMes are minimal forS= 2 iron(ii). While significant progress has been made in the understanding of metal-NHC bonding and electronic structure in precious metal systems, especially electron rich systems with CO ligation, the elucidation of electronic structure and bonding in high-spin iron-NHC systems remains limited. In the present study, the first application of an approach combining magnetic circular dichroism studies to evaluate LF transitions, 10Dq(Td) and metal-centered charge-transfer transitions with detailed DFT studies including Mayer bond order and charge decomposition analyses is used to evaluate electronic structure and bonding in electron poor iron-NHCs. In contrast to IR-based methods reliant upon CO ligation, this approach is a direct probe of electronic structure in iron-NHC complexes and broadly applicable to anyS greater than 0 iron-NHC species and, hence, is not limited to the low-spin iron species generally present with CO ligation. In terms of catalysis, the ability to probe electronic structure and bonding in more electron deficient iron species is essential as it has been proposed that such iron(i) and iron(ii) species may be active in cross-coupling. Near-infrared MCD studies of distorted tetrahedral (IMes)2FeCl2compared to a series of L2FeCl2distorted tetrahedral (L = phosphine or amine) permitthe first direct elucidation of 10Dq(TNone) and hence, ligand field strength, of NHCs relative to phosphine and diamine ligands. From these studies, 10Dq(Td) for (IMes)2FeCl2is found to be intermediate in magnitude relative to the corresponding phosphine (largest 10Dq(Td)) and diamine (smallest 10Dq(Td)) complexes. While the observed 10Dq(Td) values initially appear to contradict existing views of NHCs as stronger field ligands than phosphines,None,NoneMayer bond order and charge decomposition analyses indicate that the NHC is a stronger donor ligand than phosphines. The origin of the reduced 10Dq(Td) value with NHC ligation is found to reflect the significant weakening of the Fe-Cl bonds (leading to reduced Fe-Cl bond orders and reduced charge donation from Cl to Fe) in the NHC complexes relative to the comparable amine and phosphine complexes. While strongtrans-type influences in metal-NHCs have been previously proposed,Nonethis study provides the first direct quantitative evaluation of this in terms of the resulting energies of both the occupied and unoccupied d orbitals. These effects are significant in L2FeCl2complexes as indicated by the large differences in 10Dq(Td),clearly demonstrating that NHCs are not simple analogues of phosphine ligands for iron. Importantly, the differences in the electronic structures of iron-NHCvs.iron-phosphine complexes are likely a significant contributing factor to the differing catalytic performances observed with these ligands. For example, the variations in the d orbital energies (both occupied and unoccupied) could directly affect the reaction barriers for homolytic R-X cleavage or oxidative addition proposed in iron-catalyzed cross-coupling. None-NoneFurthermore, the significant effect of iron-NHC coordination on the ligation strength of other ligands to iron, such as nucleophile-derived ligands in cross-coupling, could provide a pathway to modulate the reactivity of coordinated ligands that ultimately form new C-C bonds upon reaction with electrophiles. For example, it is anticipated that thetrans-type influence due to the NHC ligation will result in atranseffect where the rate of Fe-Cl substitution/transmetalation will be increased. Similarly, for transmetalated iron species of the form (IMes)2FeRX or (IMes)2FeR2, the rate of Fe-R bond dissociation required for cross-coupled product generation should also be increased due to this effect. Analogous studies of electronic structure and bonding as a function of NHC backbone structure (e.g. saturated, unsaturated, chlorinated) in both three- and four-coordinate iron(ii)-NHC complexes were also performed due to the significant differences reported in catalytic systems as a function of NHC backbone structure. In these high-spin iron(ii) systems (S= 2), minimal effects were observed as a function of NHC backbone structure. However, the small differences in back donation observed are likely amplified at lower oxidation states of iron due to the resulting decrease in the energy separation between the occupied iron d orbitals and the unoccupied NHC pi* orbitals as the iron oxidation state is reduced below iron(ii). While the iron(i)-NHC complex, (IMes)2FeCl, has been recently reported in the literature,Noneiron(i)-NHC complexes with varied NHC backbone structures are not yet known. However, preliminary DFT and spectroscopic studies of (IMes)2FeCl are consistent with a significant increase in Fe-Cl - greater than IMes2backdonation upon reduction to iron(i). Once iron(i) complexes with varied NHC ligands are synthetically accessible, electronic structure studies can provide further insight into the effects of NHC structure on iron-NHC bonding as a function of iron oxidation state. The continued application of the combined MCD and DFT approach employed herein to additional iron-NHC systems, including N-substituent variations in iron(ii)-NHCs and iron(i)-NHCs as a function of coordination number, geometry and supporting ligands, should continue to expand our fundamental understanding of iron-NHC electronic structure and bonding. Ultimately, such studies will continue to provide critical insight into the molecular-level origins of variations in catalytic performance as a function of NHC structure with catalytically relevant supporting ligands.