Gene expression profiling divides breast cancer into distinct molecular portraits according to the presence of the estrogen receptor (ER) and amplification/overexpression of theERBB2/HER2/neuoncogene (1). Notably, HER2 amplification/overexpression (HER2-positive) predicts response to anti-HER2 therapy, suggesting that somatic alterations in breast cancer are associated with prognosis and potentially amenable to targeted therapy (2). This has inspired efforts to better understand the spectrum of somatic "driver" mutations and, in particular, targetable mutated kinases. An abundance of data suggests that genetic aberrations and activation of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) pathway are important in determining breast cancer prognosis and the efficacy of standard chemo- and endocrine therapies (3). Furthermore, mutations in thePIK3CAgene, which encodes the p110alpha catalytic subunit of the class IA PI3K, are frequent in breast cancer (4-7). These mutations have been shown to be oncogenic in mammary epithelial cells by driving constitutive, growth factor-independent PI3K pathway activation (8,9). Despite being the focus of intense research interest, a clear association betweenPIK3CAmutations and a poorer prognosis has not been shown. To the contrary,PIK3CAmutations have been associated with statistically significantly better survival when compared withPIK3CAwild-type breast cancers in larger series obtained from single institutions (4,7-10). An association with resistance to endocrine therapy has also not been demonstrated (6,11,12). PIK3CAmutations have also been shown to be associated with trastuzumab resistance in preclinical models overexpressing HER2 (13-15). Clinical validation of this association could have important clinical utility given the emergence of a broadening array of anti-HER2 agents and the concept of dual anti-HER2 therapy (16-18). Hence, given their frequency, oncogenic capabilities, and the potential to induce resistance to commonly prescribed breast cancer treatments, the clinical relevance ofPIK3CAmutations deserves further clarification. High levels of evidence on the clinical utility of prognostic and predictive biomarkers can be achieved from the use of archived tumor specimens from appropriate randomized clinical trial datasets (19). Therefore, the main purpose of this study was to clarify in a well-characterized, randomized clinical trial dataset the predictive relevance ofPIK3CAmutations to trastuzumab efficacy and its prognostic abilities in both HER2-positive and HER2-negative disease. Given thatPIK3CAgenotyping can be performed with other somatic hotspot mutations, we also set out to determine prevalence and prognostic associations of other known cancer driver mutations. Our objective was to identify other potentially targetable genetic alterations that contribute to resistance to standard therapy in breast cancer. The Reporting Recommendations for Tumor Marker Prognostic Studies (REMARK) criteria were followed in this study (20). This study is based on formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) primary breast tumor tissue samples of Finnish women who were aged less than 66 years and diagnosed with either node-positive or node-negative breast cancer and who participated in the FinHER trial (N = 1010) from 2000 to 2003, a multicenter adjuvant trial sponsored by the Finnish Breast Cancer Group (21,22). All women were randomly assigned to receive three cycles of docetaxel or vinorelbine, followed by (in both groups) three cycles of fluorouracil, epirubicin, and cyclophosphamide. The 232 women whose tumors had an amplified HER2/neugene were further randomly assigned to receive or to not receive nine weekly trastuzumab infusions. The primary end point of the FinHER study, distant disease-free survival (DDFS), has been previously reported to be superior for the docetaxel- and trastuzumab-containing arms. The final median follow-up was 62 months (21). The determination of steroid hormone receptor status and HER2 expression by immunohistochemistry (IHC) was required locally and was performed according to the guidelines of each institution during the time of the study. Samples were considered hormone receptor positive if their level of ER and/or progesterone receptor (PR) was greater than =10%. All patients with ER- or PR-positive tumors received five years of endocrine therapy, which was tamoxifen when the study commenced, but aromatase inhibitors were permitted midway through the study. Ki67 IHC was assessed in locally by IHC using the Mib-1 monoclonal antibody (Dako, Glostrup, Denmark). When HER2 expression was scored as 2+ or 3+ (on a scale of 0, 1+, 2+, or 3+), the number of copies of the HER2/neugene was centrally determined by means of chromogenic in situ hybridization in one of two reference laboratories. Study participants provided written informed consent to allow further research analyses to be carried out on their tumor tissue. The ethical committee of the Helsinki University Central Hospital also approved the current study. Of the 1010 samples, 935 (92.5%) could be retrieved. All samples were reevaluated by one reference pathologist to ensure tumor was present in the tissue sample. Of these samples, 705 (75.4%) were able to have adequate DNA extracted. DNA was extracted from FFPE tumor tissue using a salt precipitation method (23). Because few data were available about the mutational landscape of breast cancer at the time of genotyping, we queried the COSMIC (Catalogue of Somatic Mutations in Cancer) database to identify a broad range of genes for hotspot somatic mutation profiling (24). We ultimately covered 94% of reportedPIK3CAmutations (exons 1, 2, 4, 9, 13, 18, 20) reported in COSMIC to be occurring in breast cancer in this study, 12% ofTP53mutations (all cancer types), selectedERBB2,PTEN, AKT1/2mutations, and knownEGFR, BRAF, KRAS, MAP3K1, andCDK4mutations, as well as a scattering of other "druggable" mutations. In total, 70 mutations in 20 genes were evaluated (Supplementary Table 1, available online). The samples were genotyped centrally using the Sequenom MassARRAY Assay Design 3.1 with the default parameters. Multiplex polymerase chain reaction was done in 5-uL volume containing 5-10ng of DNA. Samples were considered to be of sufficient quality when genotyping could be performed for greater than 75% of the mutations. A total of 687 samples (68.1% of the original FinHER cohort) were successfully genotyped (2.5% [18 of 705] samples were discarded for this reason). Sixteen samples were genotyped in duplicate and were found to have 100% concordance. Details about the assay and independent validation have been previously published: the Sequenom can detect low-frequency mutant alleles to maximize mutation detection in impure samples ( greater than =5% for the PIK3CA hotspot mutations) with sensitivity and specificity of 90% and 99%, respectively, in FFPE-derived DNA, and 100% concordance with other technologies (25,26). In this study, we further confirmed one sample of each positivePIK3CAmutation, as well as a wild-type sample, using Sanger sequencing (except for the rarer G241A, G3019C, and C473T); another 9 samples (both positive and wild type) were confirmed with the Qiagen Rotor-gene Kit. All of these were found to be 100% concordant with the Sequenom results. ERBB2mutations were also confirmed using Sanger sequencing (primers TCCTGGAAGGCAGGTAGGATCCAG and AGTCTAGGTTTGCGGGAGTCATATCTC). In this study, a sample was considered to be wild type for a given gene if no mutation was found. Associations between mutations and clinicopathologic characteristics were investigated with chi2tests for categorical variables. For the survival analyses, the primary end point was DDFS, which was defined as the time period from the date of random treatment assignment to the date of first cancer recurrence outside the ipsilateral locoregional region or to death, whenever death occurred before distant recurrence (21). Relapse-free survival (RFS) was defined as the time from the date of random assignment to the date of the local, distant, or contralateral invasive cancer recurrence or death. Overall survival (OS) was defined as the time period from the date of random assignment to the date of death, whenever death occurred before distant recurrence. Cox proportional hazards regression models were used to test the prognostic value ofPIK3CAmutation status (hazard ratios [HRs] and 95% confidence intervals [CIs]) and its possible interaction with trastuzumab treatment (after adding a trastuzumab main effect and a product interaction term) using the Wald test. The Cox models used a separate baseline hazard for chemotherapy type (docetaxel or vinorelbine). Departures from the proportional hazards assumption were assessed based on the Schoenfeld residuals (27). AllPvalues were two-sided and aPvalue of less than .05 was considered statistically significant. The Kaplan-Meier survival curves were calculated (with group differences assessed using the log-rank test). Interaction effects were also displayed using forest plots. No adjustment was planned for multiple testing of the prespecified hypotheses. For this study, breast cancer subtypes were classified using IHC as previously published (28): luminal (ER-positive and/or progesteron receptor [PgR]-positive, HER2-negative), HER2-positive/overexpressing by (chromogenic in situ hybridization), and triple negative: ER-negative/PgR-negative/HER2-negative. Luminal A and B phenotypes were defined using IHC staining of Ki67-positive cells using a cutoff of less than 14% and greater than 14%, respectively (28). The patient characteristics of the genotyped series (n = 687) are compared with the original series and those who were not genotyped inSupplementary Table 2(available online). There were more tumors that were ER-negative, of larger size and higher grade, and from younger patients genotyped compared with those not genotyped. There were no statistically significant differences in survival between groups (DDFS log-rankP= .19, RFSP= .34, OSP= .64). Despite genotyping this cohort for 70 known cancer somatic "driver" mutations in 20 genes, onlyPIK3CAandTP53somatic mutations occurred at frequencies greater than 10%. PIK3CAmutations were successfully genotyped in 100% of samples that passed the quality control criteria. 176PIK3CAmutations were found (Supplementary Table 3, available online). The vast majority of these were located on the hotspots on the helical and kinase domains (exons 9 and 20, respectively-161 of 176 [91.5%]), with two samples having a doublePIK3CAmutation present (A3140G + C473T; T1035A + G1633A). The overall frequency of tumor samples with a PIK3CA mutation was 25.3% (174 of 687). TP53mutations, with coverage of approximately 12% of known mutations, were present in 10.2% (70 of 687) of samples. ThreeERBB2kinase domain mutations (two *T2264C, C2313T) were present in 0.5% of samples genotyped (3 of 659 [28 of 687 samples could not be assigned]). Mutations that occurred only once wereKRAS(G35A),AKT2(G49A),ALK(G3824A), andSTK11/LKB1(C1062G) (Figure 1). Frequency and associations between mutations. Absolute numbers are shown ofPIK3CAmutant,PIK3CAwild type,ERBB2mutant, andTP53mutant, as well as those tumors with coexisting mutations. PIK3CAexon 9 and 20 mutations (and other locations) are also shown. PIK3CAmutations were statistically significantly associated with smaller tumor size (T1,P= .03), histological grade 1 (P less than .001), positive expression of the ER (P less than .001), and the luminal-A phenotype (P= .04;Table 1). As expected,TP53mutations were associated with ER negativity (P= .005), histological grade 3 (P= .007), larger tumor size (P= .009), and four or more positive lymph nodes (P= .003). All threeERBB2mutant samples were ER-positive and HER2-negative (luminal). In the three main breast cancer subtypes defined using IHC, as expected,PIK3CAmutations were highly frequent in luminal and HER2-positive subtypes (P less than .001) and TP53 mutations in the triple-negative group (P= .003;Table 2). Patient and tumor characteristics by PIK3CA genotype**Pvalues were calculated using a two-sided chi2test. ER = estrogen receptor; IHC = immunohistochemistry; mt = mutation; NA = not applicable; WT = wild type. Frequency of mutations by breast cancer subtype**Pvalues were calculated using a two-sided chi2test. ER = estrogen receptor. In the whole cohort that was genotyped,PIK3CAmutations were not statistically significantly associated with prognosis (DDFS: HR = 0.88 [95% CI = 0.58 to 1.34],P= .56; OS: HR = 0.603 [95% CI = 0.32 to 1.13],P= .11;Figure 2). However, we noted that there was a statistically significant nonproportional prognostic effect over time for DDFS (P= .002) and RFS (P= .007) but not for OS (P= .12). An exploratory subdivision of the time axis at three years shows a favorable prognostic effect before three years (DDFS: HR = 0.57 [95% CI = 0.31 to 1.03],P= .06; RFS: HR = 0.55 [95% CI = 0.31 to 0.98],P= .04, respectively, and statistically nonsignificant effect after 3 years: DDFS: HR = 1.69 [95% CI = 0.90 to 3.16],P= .10; RFS: HR = 1.58 [95% CI = 0.86 to 2.88],P= .14). Prognostic associations between patients who had aPIK3CAmutation (mt) vs wild type (WT) and clinical outcome. A-C)Kaplan-Meier plots of the cumulative proportion of patients surviving with the time in years. Various clinical end points are shown: distant disease-free survival (A), recurrence-free survival (B), and overall survival (C). Cox regression hazard ratios (HRs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) are shown, stratified by chemotherapy type given. All statistical tests are two-sided. The number of patients at risk in each group is given below the graphs. No statistically significant differences in patient outcome were observed whenPIK3CAmutations were evaluated separately according to their location (Figure 3). Patients whose tumors contained aPIK3CAmutation were also not found to have a statistically significantly different survival than those with wild type in any of the breast cancer subtypes (Supplementary Figure 1, available online). Prognostic associations betweenPIK3CAgenotype and clinical outcome according to mutation location on the gene (helical/exon 9 vs kinase/exon 20 domain). The number of patients at risk in each group is given below the graphs. A-C)Kaplan-Meier plots of the cumulative proportion of patients surviving with the time in years. Various clinical end points are shown: distant disease-free survival (A), recurrence-free survival (B), and overall survival (C). The two patients with dual mutations were excluded and all treatment arms were pooled. Pvalues correspond to log-rank tests; mt = mutant; WT = wild type. All statistical tests are two-sided. TP53mutations were not statistically significantly associated with prognosis in the whole genotyped cohort (DDFS log-rankP= .36; RFSP= .34; OSP= .11). Of the threeERBB2mutated tumors, one patient had a distant relapse and died of her disease. We subsequently evaluated the association betweenPIK3CAgenotype and trastuzumab efficacy in the HER2-positive population, considering preclinical data suggesting thatPIK3CAmutations contribute to trastuzumab resistance (13,15). We found that in our dataset, the magnitude of trastuzumab benefit (with cytotoxic chemotherapy) did not differ statistically significantly according toPIK3CAgenotype (Figure 4;Pinteraction: DDFSP= .14; RFSP= .17; OSP= .24). For the primary endpoint of DDFS and trastuzumab benefit, patients who werePIK3CAmutant had an HR of 0.19 (95% CI = 0.04 to 1.04;P= .06) vs patients who werePIK3CAwild type (HR = 0.98 [95% CI = 0.47 to 2.8],P= .97). Interaction betweenPIK3CAgenotype and trastuzumab efficacy. A)Kaplan-Meier plots comparing trastuzumab vs no trastuzumab treatment arms forPIK3CAmutated (mt), HER2-positive cohorts. Cumulative proportions of patients surviving distant disease free are shown. B)Kaplan-Meier plots comparing trastuzumab vs no trastuzumab forPIK3CAwild-type (WT), HER2-positive cohorts. Cumulative proportions of patients surviving distant disease free are shown. C)Interaction forest plots indicate Cox regression hazard ratios (HRs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) stratified by chemotherapy type given for trastuzumab benefit for distant disease-free survival (DDFS). according toPIK3CAgenotype and by overall series. D)Kaplan-Meier plots comparing trastuzumab vs no trastuzumab treatment arms forPIK3CAmt, HER2-positive cohorts. Cumulative proportions of patients surviving relapse free are shown. E)Kaplan-Meier plots comparing trastuzumab vs no trastuzumab treatment arms forPIK3CAWT, HER2-positive cohorts. Cumulative proportions of patients surviving relapse free are shown. F)Interaction forest plots indicate Cox regression HRs and 95% CIs stratified by chemotherapy type given for trastuzumab benefit for recurrence-free survival (RFS) according toPIK3CAgenotype and by overall series. G)Kaplan-Meier plots comparing trastuzumab vs no trastuzumab treatment arms forPIK3CAmt, HER2-positive cohorts. Cumulative proportions of patients alive are shown. H)Kaplan-Meier plots comparing trastuzumab vs no trastuzumab treatment arms forPIK3CAWT, HER2-positive cohorts. Cumulative proportions of patients alive are shown. I)Interaction forest plots indicate Cox regression HRs and 95% CIs stratified by chemotherapy type given for trastuzumab benefit for overall survival. according toPIK3CAgenotype and by overall series. All statistical tests are two-sided. The number of patients at risk in each group is given below the graphs. The primary objective of this study was to investigate the clinical relevance ofPIK3CAmutations with regard to prognosis and benefit from adjuvant trastuzumab. While confirming the dominance ofPIK3CAandTP53mutations in breast cancer with few other known mutations being present in breast cancer at a high rate, we showed thatPIK3CAmutations, regardless of location, were not statistically significantly associated with prognosis in breast cancer over the entire follow-up period, although, interestingly, there was a statistically significant nonproportional prognostic effect for DDFS and RFS over time. Initially, a better outcome for the mutant genotype compared with wild type was seen, consistent with the mutant genotype's association with favorable clinicopathological features; however, this effect disappeared after three years. Perhaps this pattern can be explained by the high-risk population studied or reflect a biological tendency for long-term relapse, as endocrine therapy resistance could conceivably develop through enhanced PI3K signaling. In general, however, the prognostic direction in the first three years supports the results from many of the larger cohort series reported in the literature, even though the prognostic association has yielded conflicting reports overall (4-7,29). The unique advantage and strength of our study was that we could evaluate interactions betweenPIK3CAmutations and trastuzumab benefit in the context of a randomized clinical trial in which patients with HER2-positive breast cancer received treatment with or without trastuzumab. To our knowledge, this study also represents the largest breast cancer cohort with clinical outcome data to be genotyped forPIK3CAand multiple other known cancer somatic mutations. Furthermore, we covered greater than 94% of knownPIK3CAmutations, rather than limiting to hotspot areas. Preclinical data suggest thatPIK3CAmutations could identify a subgroup of patients with HER2-positive disease resistant to trastuzumab, but our data do not support this. In fact, thePIK3CAmutant compared with wild-type, HER2-positive tumors seemed to derive more benefit from adjuvant trastuzumab, suggesting increased dependency on p110alpha, although the interaction test is not statistically significant (30). All the patients in this study also received chemotherapy with trastuzumab, which is standard practice, so we cannot discount the possibility that mutations could cause resistance to trastuzumab as a single agent. It has been proposed that scheduling of chemotherapy either before or after administration of trastuzumab could affect clinical outcomes, particularly through immune mechanisms (31). As the generation of antitumor immunity has been proposed as a dominant mechanism of action for the efficacy of trastuzumab, it is plausible thatPIK3CAmutations could alter the immune microenvironment to be either or antitumor or protumor (31,33). PI3K signaling per se is known to affect immune signaling, although no data currently exist with regard to specific mutation-related events (34). Therefore, despitePIK3CAmutations being oncogenic activators of the PI3K pathway, overall our data support the notion thatPIK3CAmutant tumors when compared with thePIK3CAwild-type tumors are not resistant to standard adjuvant chemotherapy, trastuzumab, and endocrine therapy regimens. A biological mechanism for these observations is currently unknown. We have speculated previously thatPIK3CAmutations are not effective at completely activating the pathway and negative feedback mechanisms may serve to weaken the oncogenic signal (6). Full AKT activation has not been associated with the mutation, and AKT-independent signaling has been proposed through PDK1-SGK3, with SGK3 also implicated with estrogen signaling (7,35-37). Estrogen has also been shown predominantly to repress transcription of many genes, which may also reduce the final signaling output (38,39). High levels of pathway activation could be detrimental for tumor growth (ie, result in senescence), analogous to PTEN deficiency (40). Regardless, it seems that high levels of pathway activation are not associated withPIK3CAmutations per se. We hypothesize thatPIK3CAmutations may be more important in breast cancer initiation and malignant transformation whereas other mutations may be required to drive the acquisition of aggressive biological features: it is notable thatPIK3CAmutations often coexist with other lesions in the same pathway (30,41-43). It remains to be seen if primary and/or metastatic breast cancer patients withPIK3CAmutations will derive increased benefit from PI3K pathway-targeted drugs, which has been observed in vitro (44-46). Many clinical trials evaluating potential benefit from specific PI3K targeted drugs are currently ongoing. This study, as well as others using massively parallel sequencing, have confirmed that breast cancers contain a large number of known cancer driver mutations that occur infrequently (42,43,47,48). In this cohort we have identified threeERBB2as well as singleKRAS, ALK, STK11/LKB1, andAKT2mutations. These are known "driver" mutations, yet it is unknown how these influence outcomes or are amenable to targeted therapies in breast cancer. ERRB2kinase domain mutations have recently been shown to be important in breast cancer; hence, this mutation could represent a new target for non-HER2-amplified/overexpressing breast cancer (49-52). To our knowledge, this is the only study thus far to address the relevance ofPIK3CAgenotype and trastuzumab benefit. We acknowledge several limitations of our study, specifically the low number of events in the HER2-positive subgroup, which does not exclude the possibility that an effect might be seen in a larger series; less than 100% coverage of all reportedPIK3CAmutations in breast cancer; and sequencing from one tumor section, given emerging data on intratumoral heterogeneity (53). Next-generation sequencing technologies may give us a more complete picture of the clonal composition and molecular landscape of these tumors. However, it is becoming clear that elucidating the relationship between infrequent but known driver genetic aberrations, prognosis, and drug response will require the genotyping of tumors from many thousands of breast cancer patients. This may also prove challenging for drug development. Nevertheless, our study provides important information from a large randomized clinical trial dataset about the prevalence and relationship between targetable and known somatic driver mutations, trastuzumab efficacy, and prognosis. This study was funded by theBreast Cancer Research Foundation. The funding source had no role in the study design, data analysis, data collection, data interpretation or writing of the report. SL, SM, and CS are supported by the Breast Cancer Research Foundation. SL is supported by theFonds JC Heuson BelgiumThis project was also supported by EU-FP7 project RESPONSIFY No 278659.