In family practice, the care of patients with multiple health problems is a growing concern. New approaches to care must be developed to cope with what most professionals consider will be a tsunami of demands, given the aging population. NoneFamily medicine research has been woefully inadequate in providing basic data on multi-morbidity that mimic the kinds of data readily available for common single chronic and infectious diseases, i.e. studies on prevalence, characterization, risk factors (or determinants) and prognosis. None,NoneThe purpose of this study is to assist researchers in their endeavours to launch prevalence studies of multi-morbidity and to help readers interpret and compare results from these studies. The need for such assistance became clear to the authors during the discussion after a presentation at the 2009 North American Primary Care Research Group. NoneIn an attempt to put one study into context, the presenter briefly compared her results with those of several other studies. The authors of those compared studies happened to be in the room and explained, during the discussion period, which methods used in their studies may have led to the contrasting results. We quickly realized that (i) the 'Methods' sections of our articles could have been more detailed had the word limits not applied, leaving the reader unable to fairly interpret the results when comparing one study with another and (ii) standards for calculating and reporting multi-morbidity were lacking. Therefore, our comparative analysis produced the following: (i) a preliminary set of methodological considerations for cross-sectional and retrospective cohort studies of multi-morbidity in primary care; (ii) a description of the methods across the three studies as examples; (iii) re-estimates of prevalence rates conducted using identical age-sex groups; and (iv) a detailed assessment of the methods thought to be pertinent to the rates. This study reviewed the methods and results of three separate studies of multi-morbidity in primary care herein referred to as (i) the Saguenay study, from the Saguenay region of Quebec, Canada;None(ii) a BEACH substudy, from the Bettering the Evaluation and Care of Health programme in Australia;None,Noneand (iii) the DELPHI study, from theDeliverPrimaryHealth CareInformation Project in South-western Ontario, Canada. None,NoneThe three studies were selected based on the participation of the authors in the discussion after the presentation at the 2009 North American Primary Care Research GroupNoneregarding their varying results. For the purposes of this study, the raw data used in each of the three prior studies were extracted and the rates of multi-morbidity were compared for the realigned six age-sex groups: 18-44 years, 45-64 years and greater than 65 years. These data were not adjusted for the cluster design of their studies (clustering of patients by physician or practice) or for representation of their respective population profiles. In addition, the authors reviewed the three studies and emailed for clarification of the methods used to produce the published results. Points of difference among the methods were found in an iterative process, through review of the studies, by discussion at meetings and through teleconferences and email. The following areas were discussed: (i) research design; (ii) population and sampling; (iii) data collection, including definition of chronic active problems and list of chronic conditions; and (iv) the definition of multi-morbidity. All three studies had ethical approval by their respective institutions. Table 1presents the list of methodological considerations that arose from the detailed discussions of the authors. The methodological considerations appear on the left and the possible variations appear on the right. The judgement of which variations are stronger than others is presented in the Discussion. Preliminary set of methodological considerations for cross-sectional and retrospective cohort studies in multi-morbidity (Methods Crystals for MM)Table 2presents the methods of the three studies of the authors in terms of the methodological considerations outlined above as a test of the preliminary list. During the completion of this table, the authors identified methodological details that were not described in their publications or were described elsewhere, as in the case of the BEACH substudyNone,Noneand the DELPHI study. None,NonePopulating the preliminary set of methodological considerations "Methods Crystals for MM" with three examplesBEACH, Bettering the Evaluation and Care of Health programme in Australia (2008); and DELPHI,DeliverPrimaryHealth CareInformation. Figure 1shows the re-estimated prevalence of multi-morbidity for each of the three studies, stratified by age and sex. Prevalence in the Saguenay study was significantly higher than that found in the other studies in all age-sex groups. Among the age groups, multi-morbidity prevalence varied by as much as 61%, where the reported prevalence among women aged 45-64 was 95% in the Saguenay study, 46% in the BEACH substudy and 34% in the DELPHI study. For men and women aged 18-44, prevalence did not differ between the BEACH and DELPHI studies. However, for both men and women aged 44-64 and greater than 65, the prevalence varied significantly among the three studies. Results of thirty-six post-hoc multi-morbidity tests by age and sex were significantly different among all three studies (Pearson chi-square analysis). One interpretation of the results seen inFigure 1is that they are real; the rates of multi-morbidity in the Saguenay region of Quebec are much higher than those in the region of South-western Ontario, with the rates in Australia, for the most part, falling in between. However, the authors suspect that an alternative interpretation holds: differences in method may play an important part and hence the emphasis, in this study, on parsing the details of the methods and weighing their importance to the rates found. There are at least three methodological issues raised by this comparison. The first issue that researchers should consider is the extent to which the studies are sampled differently. Sample size will make a difference to the rates of multi- morbidity, with larger samples, all other methods being equal, resulting in more reliable estimates. The BEACH substudy had both a larger sample and was of a national nature compared with the Saguenay and DELPHI studies, which represented small geographic regions. With regard to recruitment of patients within each practice, all three studies in the current comparison sampled visitors to the family practice. The time period set aside for recruitment of patients in each practice varied from 2-3 weeks in the Saguenay study to several days in the BEACH substudy and 6-12 months in the DELPHI study. Regardless of this time period, all studies were more likely to have sampled frequent attenders. Another aspect of sampling was that only the DELPHI study selected a subset of consecutive patients at random, to control the workload of coding by the family physician (FP) and his or her staff. For the BEACH substudy, 30 consecutive patients were selected for recording from each FP's 100 patients contributing data to the larger BEACH Programme. In Saguenay, the study group was selected after limiting the time period to days or weeks. We believe that the random sample versus a time-limited consecutive sample was not likely to affect the rate of multi-morbidity. The second methodological issue is the completeness and accuracy of the source of data and the period of time over which data were considered for each patient. The three studies used different sources of data: Saguenay used the medical record; the BEACH substudy used the FP report, patient report and medical record; and the DELPHI study used morbidity managed at the initial and subsequent encounters coded by FPs. Incompleteness may have affected each of the studies in slightly different ways. When care was delivered by the FP but not written in the chart, there was inscription bias, leaving paper charts incomplete regarding psychological problems, social problems and some physical problems. This type of error could reflect the level of commitment of the FPs, their workload that day or recording fatigue. All diagnoses may not have been recorded. As an example, the prevalence of obesity in the Saguenay study was ~4%, which was much lower than the prevalence in the community at large. If FPs were not actively managing obesity as an entity, they did not write it in their record. NoneFurthermore, the likelihood of incompleteness may be actually higher in studies of multi-morbidity than those of single morbidity because of the complexity of the patients' constellation of problems. Furthermore, the number of visits or encounters may have affected the completeness of the data abstracted. Another aspect of incompleteness arose from the time period over which the patient record was examined. The Saguenay study used the entire record, which could have extended back over decades, to ascertain the number of morbidities. Similarly, the substudy of BEACH included FP's knowledge of the entire patient history and the patient's knowledge. In contrast, the DELPHI study used only encounters that occurred during a specific 2-year period. For identification in the DELPHI study, the FP had to have been actively managing and coding the chronic conditions during encounters over the specified 2 years. This important difference from the other two studies, in which the entire record including the problem list was used, leads to the possibility of an underestimate of multi- morbidity in the DELPHI study. Several other aspects of inaccuracy could have arisen. For example, a tentative diagnosis may have evolved over time and may or may not have been counted as multiple conditions. In the DELPHI study, such diagnoses were most likely counted multiple times, leading to a possibility of an overestimate. In the Saguenay, such tentative diagnoses could have been counted many times or not, depending on the rigour of the reviewer in following and interpreting such illness trajectories. In the BEACH substudy, the problem could only be ticked (and therefore counted) once. The previous three paragraphs indicate that although all three studies were based on real-life practice, which was an asset in itself, the pressures of the FP's workload could have minimized the completeness in each of the three studies through different mechanisms. To summarize the issues of completeness and accuracy, each methodology had strengths and limitations. Recall bias was a potential problem in the BEACH substudy, because FPs were asked to provide the morbidity data. To minimize recall bias, the study protocol asked FPs to ask the patient and to review the medical chart as they completed the data form; this review may have been conducted to a greater or lesser extent. Nonetheless, on the positive side, the FP had just seen the patient that day and re-familiarized him- or herself with the patient's problems. Additionally, on the plus side was the fact that they were led to respond to specific conditions, not record problems in free text. Incompleteness of data may have been an issue in the Saguenay study if some chronic condition data had not yet been recorded in the medical chart in a place where reviewers were looking or perhaps not yet charted at all. Incompleteness of data may have been a problem in the DELPHI study also because FPs were asked to code all problems presenting for care at each encounter and they may have left out some conditions of multi-morbid patients due to coding fatigue; perhaps the first and second conditions may have been coded, but the third, fourth and fifth conditions may have been missed. Moreover, the patient may have ongoing problems that the FP did not manage at these encounters (e.g. because the patient was under specialist care for those problems). On the third issue, we noticed that the greatest difference among the studies was the definition and the count of the chronic conditions. There were two dimensions of this issue: (i) the definition of a chronic condition; and (ii) how they were counted. The BEACH substudy captured chronic conditions out of a list of 18 specific disease entities, plus broader diagnostic group options such as 'other cardiovascular', 'other psychological problem', 'other arthritis', 'cerebrovascular disease', 'peripheral vascular disease' and 'malignant neoplasm'. NoneThe DELPHI project defined a chronic condition as any of a list of International Classification of Primary Care (ICPC-2-R)Nonerubrics adapted from Lamberts and Okkes. NoneThe Saguenay study definition was open to all diagnoses; although they used a Quebec survey listNoneto categorize conditions, they added any conditions that did not appear on that survey list and extended their codebook accordingly. With regard to counting, the BEACH substudy clustered 22 diagnoses into 8 of the CIRS domains (plus another domain for malignant neoplasms)None; therefore, the maximum number of chronic domains could not exceed nine. The conditions included those determined by the Australian Government as National Health Priority Areas,Noneselected on the basis of chronicityNoneand management frequency in Australian general practice. NoneThe DELPHI study counted any of the 98 individual chronic conditions on the adapted Lamberts and Okkes list,Nonewhich meant that the maximum could not exceed 98. The Saguenay study counted all conditions and their unique codes actually tallied to 33 separate conditions. As an example, if a patient had hypertension, peripheral vascular disease and other cardiovascular disease that would have counted as one disease domain in the BEACH substudy (vascular) and three conditions in the Saguenay and DELPHI studies. Similarly, osteoarthritis and low back pain (not related) would have been counted as one in the BEACH substudy and as two in the Saguenay and DELPHI studies. When comparing the prevalence in the sample of multi-morbidity, counting each morbidity type listed as one (rather than grouping the presence of one or multiple diseases into domains), the published results of the BEACH substudyNoneare far closer to those of the Saguenay estimates than the DELPHI estimates. To highlight the important methods issue, sampling of visiting patients may overestimate multi-morbidity but one can adjust for attendance rates. NoneThe sources of data used in these three studies overall may have underestimated multi-morbidity due to incompleteness of recording; however, some aspects of the data source for one study may have led to an overestimate. The largest difference among the three studies, likely to impact the rates of multi-morbidity, was the definition and counting of chronic conditions. Therefore, significant methodological issues may affect the results of studies of the prevalence of multi-morbidity, including sampling issues, source of data and definition and counting issues. We recommend therefore that international guideposts be developed for researchers to follow in an effort to create internationally comparable methods to study multi-morbidity. Our goal is to improve methods of studying multi-morbidity. One option would be, instead of obtaining data from existing records, researchers could consider creating a data collection specifically designed for such studies. Such a tool could be used for billing purposes, so FPs could be reimbursed for the complexity level of patients. Such a tool for research and reimbursement will become more important as the population ages. However, in the absence of such a universal tool, what can researchers do to improve the status quo? Many of the methodological details reviewed by this comparison would not be found in a 'Methods' section of typical articles, providing the reader of such studies with limited ability to interpret the results or with the necessity to contact the author for further details. Therefore, we recommend that writers and readers insist on detailed descriptions of the type of sampling, the completeness and accuracy of the source of data and the definition of the chronic conditions. We offerTable 1as a guide and call it 'Methods Crystals for MM'. Finally, the difference in definitions of chronic conditions was the most likely candidate to explain the large differences in rates of multi-morbidity among the three studies. This is a testable hypothesis. We recommend conducting further comparisons among multi-morbidity data using agreed-upon standards for the definition of chronic conditions and the way to count multi-morbidity, in order to assess the impact of these methodological variations and enhance our understanding of multi-morbidity. Funding:Martin Fortinis funded by the Chaire de recherche appliquee des IRSC sur les services et politiques de sante en maladies chroniques en soins de premiere ligne/IRSC, ISPS, FCRSS, Centre de Sante et de services sociaux de Chicoutimi. The Saguenay project was funded by the Fonds de la Recherche en Sante du Quebec. In the year of this sub-study BEACH was funded by the Australian Institute for Health and Welfare, the Australian Government Department of Veterans' Affairs, National Prescribing Service Limited, Office of the Australian Safety Commission, AstraZeneca, Roche Products, Janssen-Cilag: Merck Sharp Dohme, Pfizer Australia. The DELPHI project was funded by the Canada Foundation for Innovation, the Primary Health Care Transition Fund, and the Enhancing Quality Management in Primary Care Initiative of the Ministry of Health and Long Term Care of Ontario. The views expressed here are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Ontario Ministry of Health and Long Term Care. Dr. Stewart is funded by theDr. Brian W. Gilbert Canada ResearchChair in Primary Health Care Research. Ethical approval: none.Conflict of interest: none.