Paediatric high grade glioma (pHGG) and diffuse intrinsic pontine glioma (DIPG) are highly aggressive tumours associated with dismal prognosis. Paediatric high grade gliomas account for 8-12% of all primary paediatric CNS tumours (JonesNone, 2012). Current treatment regimens involve maximal surgical resection, radiation therapy and chemotherapy. However, despite this intensive treatment approach, 5-year survival remains between 15 and 35% (Broniscer and Gajjar, 2004). Diffuse intrinsic pontine gliomas are the most common brainstem tumours of childhood and represent one of the most challenging paediatric tumours to treat. Surgery is not an option, chemotherapeutics have failed to improve outcomes, and radiotherapy can only temporarily slow disease progression, which is associated with median survival of less than 1 year (Warren, 2012). Both pHGG and DIPG are known to have diffuse infiltrative growth patterns, and this invasive phenotype contributes to their limited therapeutic response (Demuth and Berens, 2004;Louis, 2006). As a result, there is a pressing clinical need to develop novel therapeutic approaches that effectively reduce such paediatric brain tumour migration and invasion. Adult HGG cells are known to migrate in specific patterns, following the orientation of white matter tracts, capillaries and unmyelinated axons (Louis, 2006;Agudelo-GarciaNone, 2011). Recent studies have suggested that glycogen synthase kinase-3 (GSK-3), a serine/threonine protein kinase, plays a key role in orchestrating cell migration, through regulating cellular structure, motility and dynamics of the cytoskeleton (Grimes and Jope, 2001;WakefieldNone, 2003;SunNone, 2009). The effects of small molecule GSK-3 inhibitors on blocking adult glioma migration and invasion have been demonstrated bothin vitroandin vivo(NowickiNone, 2008;WilliamsNone, 2011) and offer a potential novel anti-invasive approach for glioma. The effects of GSK-3 inhibitors on pHGG and DIPG migration and invasion are unknown, and given the distinct biological and clinical phenotype of the adult and paediatric diseases (JonesNone, 2012), warrant separate investigation. Very few studies have focused on identifying existing or novel therapeutic agents that are capable of impairing migration and invasion in pHGG and DIPG owing to limited patient tissue availability. We have conducted a comprehensive analysis of cell migration in two pHGG cell lines and one rare patient-derived DIPG cell line using a range of 2D and 3D assays. In addition, we also demonstrate for the first time that treatment with the small molecule GSK-3 inhibitors, lithium chloride (LiCl) and the indirubin derivative 6-bromoindirubin-oxime (BIO), which have previously been shown to block migration of adult glioma cells (NowickiNone, 2008;WilliamsNone, 2011), also inhibit the migration of pHGG and DIPG cellsin vitro. These agents represent novel anti-invasive candidates that may improve the clinical management of these challenging diseases in children. Paediatric glioma cell lines SF188 (Grade IV, Glioblastoma) and KNS42 (Grade IV, Glioblastoma) were obtained from Dr Chris Jones (Institute of Cancer Research, London, UK). Cells were grown in Dulbecco's Modified Eagles' medium (Sigma-Aldrich, Dorset, UK) with 10% heat-inactivated foetal calf serum (Labtech, East Sussex, UK) and 0.5% penicillin-streptomycin (Sigma-Aldrich). Cell line identity was verified by serial tandem repeat profiling at the University of Leeds. The patient autopsy-derived DIPG cell line HSJD-DIPG-007 was obtained from Dr Angel M. Carcaboso (Hospital Sant Joan de Deu Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain). Cells were cultured as tumour spheres in tumour stem base medium (Life Technologies, Paisley, UK) supplemented with B-27 (Life technologies) and human growth factors EGF, FGF-basic, PDGF-AA and PDGF-BB (Peprotech, Rocky Hill, NJ, USA). All cell lines were free of mycoplasma contamination. Reagents used were LiCl (Sigma-Aldrich) and BIO (Calbiochem, Nottingham, UK). For three-dimensional spheroid cultures, 1 * 103cells were incubated for 72 h in an ultra-low attachment round bottom 96-well plate (Costar, Corning Lifesciences, Tewksbury, MA, USA). Aggregates were then encased in 100 mul of rat tail collagen-1 (BD Biosciences) neutralised with 1 Msodium hydroxide (NaOH) in 5 * Dulbecco's Modified Eagles' medium. After polymerisation at 37 degrees C, the collagen was overlaid with 100 mul of standard growth medium+/-GSK-3 inhibitors over a range of concentrations. Spheroid expansion and invasion into the collagen matrix was monitored for 72 h using the EVOS cell imaging system (Advanced Microscopy Group, Life Technologies) and analysed with Volocity 3D Image Analysis software (Perkin-Elmer Inc., Coventry, UK) and Image J (http://rsbweb.nih.gov/ij). In order to quantify migration, two zones of migration were defined: theinvasion zonerepresents the area outside the spheroid core to where approximately 75% of migrating cells invaded into, whereas theleading edge zonerepresents the total area containing migrated cells (Supplementary Figure 1). This method has been previously described (MaNone, 2011) and improved the accuracy of the analysis. The migration index was calculated asNoneTranswell assays were performed using 8 mum pore inserts (Greiner Bio-One, Stroud, UK) pre-coated with 5 mug ml-1of the chemo-attractant fibronectin (Sigma). Cell lines were pre-treated +/-20 mMLiCl or 5 muMBIO for 1 h. Cells (5 * 104) were then placed into transwell inserts in triplicate and allowed to migrate for 4 h. Migrated cells were fixed with 1% glutaraldehyde (Sigma-Aldrich) in PBS and visualised by staining with 0.1 mug ml-1DAPI (Biotium, Hayward, CA, USA). Migration was determined by imaging DAPI nuclear stain with the EVOS imaging system and quantifying the fluorescence signal for the individual transwells using Volocity 3D Image Analysis software. To evaluate migration on 3D nanofibre scaffolds, 1 * 103cells labelled with Cell Tracker Green dye (Invitrogen, Paisley, UK) were cultured as hanging drops as described (Del DucaNone, 2004). Spheroid aggregates were transferred into wells of aligned poly-E-caprolactone nanofibre-coated culture plates (Nanofibre solutions, Columbus, OH, USA), which allows cell migration on a 3D scaffold stimulated by topographical cues (JohnsonNone, 2009). Spheroids were incubated at 37 degrees C in growth medium+/-20 mMLiCl or 5 muMBIO in triplicate and migration was monitored for 72 h using the EVOS imaging system and quantified using Image J software. Antibodies for IF studies were rat anti-alpha tubulin monoclonal antibody (Serotec, Kidlington, UK), rabbit anti-beta-catenin antibody (Sigma-Aldrich) and secondary antibodies (Alexa Fluor-conjugated reagents obtained from Molecular Probes, Paisley, UK). For the identification of focal adhesions, a staining kit (Millipore, Nottingham, UK) was used. Actin filament and nuclear staining was performed with rhodamine-phalloidin (Molecular Probes, Life Technologies) and DAPI (Molecular Probes, Life Technologies) at recommended working concentrations. For western blotting, proteins (40 mug) were separated by SDS-PAGE and transferred to nitrocellulose. Antibodies used were anti-GSK-3beta, anti-phospho-GSK-3beta(Ser9) (Cell Signaling, Danvers, MA, USA), anti-GSK-3alpha+beta(phospho Y279+Y216) (Abcam, Cambridge, UK) and secondary antibodies as per manufacturer instructions (Dako, Cambridgeshire, UK). Cells in 500 mul of growth medium+/-20 mMLiCl or 5 muMBIO were placed in each quarter of an Ibidi imaging dish (Nikon, Dusseldorf, Germany) and cultured in the incubation/imaging chamber of the Nikon Biostation IM time lapse imaging system. Cells were imaged for 24 h at 3-min intervals at 37 degrees C with 5% CO2in air. The Biostation IM associated software was used to create movie files for analysis. Cell tracking was performed in Image J with MTrackJ (www.imagescience.org/meijering/software/mtrackj/). For tracking, the nucleus of each cell was identified and tracked over 24 h at 150 min intervals. Cell viability of both monolayers and spheroid aggregates incubated with growth medium+/-GSK-3 inhibitors were measured using the WST-1 assay (Roche, West Sussex, UK) in 96 well plates, according to the manufacturer's recommendations. Tumour spheroids were imaged at 24 h, 48 h and 72 h using the EVOS cell imaging system and spheroid core area was calculated using Image J software to evaluate proliferation over time. Statistical analysis was carried out using SPSS version 21 (IBM, New York, NY, USA). Statistical significance between multiple groups was determined by ANOVA. P-values less than 0.05 were considered statistically significant. In this study, we sought to identify chemotherapeutic agents capable of impairing migration and invasion in pHGG and DIPG cell lines. Tumour spheroids represent a useful model for examining tumour biologyin vitroas they are three dimensional and comprise of a surface with ready access to nutrients and oxygen and an inner hypoxic core (NowickiNone, 2008). Moreover, once embedded in a matrix such as collagen, cells can migrate outward from the core representing a model of the process of invasion (NowickiNone, 2008). Two pHGG cell lines, SF188 (glioblastoma) and KNS42 (glioblastoma) and one patient-derived DIPG cell line, HSJD-DIPG-007, were first examined for their ability to form spheroids in culture. Similar toVinciNone(2012), we noted that all three cell lines readily formed round dense spheroids within 24 h when cultured in low adherence 96-well round bottomed plates (Figure 1A). Paediatric glioma tumour spheroids were then embedded in collagen, and cell migration was monitored over 72 h by light microscopy. The cell lines exhibited distinct migratory characteristics and migration patterns were strikingly different (Figure 1B): SF188 displayed a cogwheel pattern of migration with what appeared to be long thin symmetrical protrusions branching from the central core, whereas KNS42 and HSJD-DIPG-007 migrated by extending flattened protrusions and spreading in a sheet-like manner. The observed differences were also reflected in the migration indices obtained for the migration edge for each cell; KNS42 migrated significantly less than SF188 and HSJD-DIPG-007 (migration index 0.59). No significant difference was observed between the migration index of SF188 (0.87) and HSJD-DIPG-007 (0.78) (Figure 1C). The small molecule GSK-3 inhibitors, LiCl and the indirubin derivative BIO, have recently been shown to block migration in adult glioblastoma cell lines (NowickiNone, 2008;WilliamsNone, 2011). Moreover, indirubin derivatives extend survival in animal glioblastoma orthotopic xenograft models and block metastasisin vivo(WilliamsNone, 2011). However, whether these agents exert similar effects upon migration and invasion in pHGG and DIPG cell lines has not been previously determined. In order to answer this question, tumour spheres from each cell line were embedded in collagen, overlaid with the drugs at varying concentrations and migration and invasion were imaged over 72 h (Figure 2A and B). A migration index was then calculated for each condition to compare the invasion front and leading edge zone for each treatment (Figure 2C). We found that LiCl and BIO reduced migration and invasion in a concentration-dependent manner (Figure 2C). After 72 h, 10 or 5 muMBIO significantly blocked invasion of both pHGG cell lines (Figure 2C) (mean+/-s.e.m. SF188 leading edge; control medium 0.869+/-0.014, BIO 10 muM0.292+/-0.069P less than 0.001, BIO 5 muM0.401+/-0.065P less than 0.001 KNS42 leading edge; control medium 0.587+/-0.31, BIO 10 muM0.157+/-0.036P less than 0.001, BIO 5 muM0.166+/-0.033P less than 0.001). The invasion of the DIPG cell line at 72 h was significantly blocked by BIO at both 5 and 1 muM(mean+/-s.e.m. HSJD-DIPG-007 leading edge; control medium 0.784+/-0.1, BIO 5 muM0.0P less than 0.001, BIO 1 muM0.36+/-0.040P less than 0.001). Treatment with 40 and 20 mMLiCl for 72 h also caused a statistically significant reduction of invasion for SF188 and KNS42 (for both the invasion front and leading edge (Figure 2C)) (mean+/-s.e.m. SF188 leading edge; control medium 0.869+/-0.014, LiCl 40 mM0.256+/-0.042P less than 0.001, LiCl 20 mM0.667+/-0.05P=0.005, KNS42 control medium 0.587+/-0.31, LiCl 40 mM0.123+/-0.02P less than 0.001, LiCl 20 mM0.112+/-0.026P less than 0.001). LiCl at 20 mMand 5 mMsignificantly reduced the invasion of HSJD-DIPG-007 following 72 h of treatment (mean+/-s.e.m. HSJD-DIPG-007 leading edge; control medium 0.784+/-0.1, LiCl 20 mM0.19+/-0.92P less than 0.01, LiCl 5 mM0.322+/-0.11P less than 0.05). To confirm that the observed effects on migration after drug treatment were the result of specific anti-migratory effects and not caused by non-specific cytotoxic or anti-proliferative effects, we investigated the effects of the two inhibitors on spheroid viability by WST-1 assays. This assay has previously been used to determine the viability of cells grown as spheroids (Van BeusechemNone, 2003). In the 3D spheroid system, both pHGG cell lines displayed viability of at least 75% or above for all treatments with LiCl and BIO (Figure 2D). Proliferation, as determined by spheroid core size changed over time, was only reduced at 40 mMLiCl in SF188 (Supplementary Figure 2). The effect of LiCl and BIO on migration has previously been investigated in adult glioma and their anti-migratory activity has been attributed to their ability to inhibit GSK-3 and stabilisebeta-catenin (NowickiNone, 2008;WilliamsNone, 2011). In order to confirm that LiCl and BIO target GSK-3 in pHGG, we carried out western blot analysis of the activated and inactivated forms of GSK-3 protein. LiCl increased Ser9 phosphorylated GSK-3beta(inactivated form) and BIO decreased the activating tyrosine of GSK-3alphabeta(Supplementary Figure 3). Next, we examinedbeta-catenin localisation and staining by IF post treatment (Figure 2E and F). For SF188, cells treated with both LiCl or BIO displayed reduced staining ofbeta-catenin at the plasma membrane with enhanced cytoplasmic and peri-nuclear staining. This was more marked for cells treated with BIO than LiCl (Figure 2E). For KNS42, surface and intracellular staining ofbeta-catenin was observed in the control; however, BIO and LiCl treatment resulted in internalisation ofbeta-catenin, which was more pronounced for BIO treatment (Figure 2F). In order to confirm the anti-migratory effects of LiCl and BIO observed in the spheroid model, a 2D transwell assay was performed. Both pHGG cell lines were able to migrate through the transwell membranes, with SF188 demonstrating the most migration over 4 h (data not shown). In the transwell experiments, treatment with 20 mMLiCl and 5muM BIO reduced cell migration in both SF188 and KNS42 confirming the results obtained from the spheroid assays (Figure 3A). Five micromoles of BIO reduced migration in both pHGG cell lines and reached statistical significance for KNS42. Treatment with 20 mMLiCl also reduced migration in both cell lines and reached statistical significance for SF188. We conclude that at concentrations of 20 mMand 5 muMrespectively, LiCl and BIO have significant anti-migratory effects on pHGG cells. Consequently, all subsequent migration assays and IF studies were performed on cells treated with LiCl or BIO at these concentrations. Additionally, at the same highest concentrations of NaCl or DMSO, no adverse effects on cell biology were observed; thus, we carried out all subsequent experiments using growth medium (Dulbecco's Modified Eagles' medium plus 10% heat-inactivated foetal calf serum) as the control. Next, we assessed the effect of LiCl and BIO treatment on cell monolayer viability via a WST-1 assay over a time course of 72 h (Figure 3B). SF188 was the most sensitive cell line to both treatments. At 24 h, which would most closely correlate to the time scale for the transwell assay, both cell lines demonstrated greater than 80% viability when treated with LiCl. SF188 was more sensitive to 10 muMBIO at 24 h, with cell viability at 57% however, KNS42 was resistant to the effects of BIO with greater than 90% cell viability demonstrated at 24 h. Over 72 h, when cultured as monolayers, both pHGG cell lines exhibited increased sensitivity to LiCl and BIO treatment compared with spheroid cultures. This is unsurprising because 3D aggregates of tumour cells, including pHGG cells, have been shown to be generally more drug resistant than 2D cultures (MehtaNone, 2012;SmithNone, 2012). Finally, to demonstrate that LiCl and BIO are not directly cytotoxic at concentrations of 20 mMand 5 muMrespectively, monolayers of both pHGG cell lines were imaged by time lapse microscopy following treatment with LiCl and BIO for 24 h. After 24 h, the drugs were removed, and both pHGG cell lines demonstrated recovery and resumed their normal morphology (results not shown). A nanofibre-based assay was also used to assess the effect of GSK-3 inhibition on migration of pHGG cell lines on a 3D scaffold. This assay utilises aligned fibres of polycaprolactone to stimulate cell migration via topographic cues (JohnsonNone, 2009). When cells are plated on the nanofibre scaffold they adhere, elongate and move along the fibre axis (Figure 4A). Firstly, we noted that each pHGG cell line was able to migrate in this model system and further confirmation of the anti-migratory effect of the GSK-3 inhibitors LiCl and BIO was obtained. As seen in previous assays, SF188 was the most migratory cell line in terms of distance travelled. Perimeter indices (% increase from the spheroid perimeter to the perimeter marking the migrated cells) were calculated for each cell line. Treatment with LiCl and BIO decreased the migration index (Figure 4B) and perimeter index (Figure 4C) for both pHGG cell lines when compared with controls. However, the effect was more marked for KNS42 when compared with SF188. Given the accumulation of evidence that LiCl and BIO are able to reduce the migration of SF188 and KNS42 cells, we went on to hypothesise that we should be able to detect direct changes in cell morphology and motility following treatment. We investigated the effects of LiCl and BIO on individual cell morphology by live cell imaging over 24 h. SF188 and KNS42 cells were incubated with 20 mMLiCl, 5 muMBIO or control medium and time lapse imaging was performed for 24 h (Figure 5A and B). In terms of motility, SF188 cells were more motile and demonstrated greater velocity than KNS42 cells (mean+/-s.e.m. velocity SF188 control 0.295+/-0.0018 mum min-1KNS42 control 0.0599+/-0.0048 mum min-1) (Figure 5C-E). Cells from both lines were able to polarise under normal conditions; however, treatment with 20 mMLiCl and 5 muMBIO reduced polarity as demonstrated by a reduction in displacement, but this did not reach statistical significance (displacement SF188 control 176.5+/-74.6, LiCl 20 mM52.5+/-15.3, BIO 5 mumol 107.2+/-61.7, KNS42 control 28.6+/-8.23, LiCl 20 mM14.7+/-2.35, BIO 5 mumol 14.19+/-1.9). Twenty millimoles of LiCl and 5 muM BIO reduced the velocity of SF188 cells (control 0.295+/-0.0018 mum min-1, LiCl 20 mM0.153+/-0.047 mum min-1P=0.049, BIO 5 mumol 0.21+/-0.041 mum min-1P=0.247) whereas treatment only with 5 muMBIO reduced the velocity of KNS42 cells (control 0.0599+/-0.0048 mum min-1, LiCl 20 mM0.0761+/-0.0063 mum min-1P=0.98, BIO 5 mumol 0.0501+/-0.041 mum min-1P=0.345). LiCl and BIO appeared to have a greater effect on the polarity of KNS42 cells than velocity. Apart from the effects on cell motility, both LiCl and BIO appeared to affect cell morphology with cells rounding up after treatment and demonstrating loss of polarity and blebbing (Figure 5A and B). Non-apoptotic plasma membrane blebbing has been implicated in cell movement, mode of migration and disruption of actin-membrane interactions (Fackler and Grosse, 2008). Taken together, these observations may explain why the cells incubated with these drugs demonstrated a reduction in migration in the previous experiments. We next utilised IF techniques to investigate the effects of the GSK-3 inhibitors on the microtubule cytoskeleton (polarity), actin cytoskeleton (morphology, motility) and focal adhesions (cell motility, morphology). Both cell lines were characterised by distinctive microtubule network, actin cytoskeleton and focal adhesion staining patterns. Immunofluorescence labelling revealed either elaborate microtubule networks across the whole cell body or a more pronounced cell surface localisation, whereas for actin we observed stress fibres, cortical actin or a diffuse internal localisation ('other') and whole body, cortical or diffuse focal adhesion labelling, which changed in response to treatment. Untreated SF188 cells appeared as large cells with a microtubule network, pronounced actin stress fibres and focal adhesions across the whole cell body (Figure 6A). After treatment with 20 mMLiCl and 5 muMBIO, we observed that the cells appeared more rounded with pronounced microtubule localisation on the cell surface. Actin stress fibre labelling in the control cells was marked and decreased in the cells treated with LiCl and BIO with a more diffuse cortical and internal actin distribution ('other'). (Figure 6C). Focal adhesions across the cell body were diminished after treatment with the inhibitors and, when present, re-distributed to the surface of the cells (Figure 6D). KNS42 cells appeared as medium-sized elongated cells with a microtubule network and had diffuse actin stress fibres (Figure 6B). Focal adhesions appeared to be associated with actin filaments in untreated cells. After addition of the inhibitors, the cells rounded up and were smaller in comparison to the untreated cells. The microtubule network was still present, however, actin stress fibres appeared to be less pronounced (especially after treatment with BIO) (Figure 6C) and focal adhesions co-localised diffusely with the actin filament and when present relocated to the cortex (Figure 6D). Paediatric high grade glioma and DIPG are devastating tumours associated with poor prognosis and despite attempts at aggressive therapy, tumours inevitably recur owing to their diffuse and invasive nature. As a result, there is a need to identify and develop novel therapeutic approaches that target and block tumour invasion. In this study, we characterised the migratory behaviour of two pHGG cell lines and one patient-derived DIPG cell line in 2D and 3D models and investigated their response to GSK-3 inhibitors. We have shown that different paediatric glioma cell lines are able to grow as tumour spheroids, which are capable of migrating through a collagen matrix. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time that DIPG migration has been described using a 3D model. Each cell line investigated demonstrated a unique pattern of migration and invasion. We also examined the motility of individual pHGG cells via live cell imaging, which indicated different speeds and morphology in two cell lines. In addition, we have demonstrated for the first time that LiCl and BIO, which have anti-invasive effects in adult glioma cell lines (NowickiNone, 2008;WilliamsNone, 2011), also inhibit the migration of paediatric glioma cells in 2D (transwell) and 3D (spheroid invasion assay and nanofibre plates) assays. We observed a significant inhibition of migration with 5 muMBIO and 20 mMLiCl in all of our paediatric glioma cell lines. This was not accompanied by marked loss of viability when SF188 and KNS42 cells were cultured as multicellular spheroids. Our data correlate with previously published results for these inhibitors in adult glioma models (NowickiNone, 2008;WilliamsNone, 2011). Finally, we have shown that LiCl and BIO treatment altered the motility of individual pHGG cells, resulting in overall reduced movement, loss of polarity and cell rounding. This observation is novel and demonstrates the specific effects of LiCl and BIO on cell morphology and motility. Overall, our study is amongst the very few to have identified existing clinical and preclinical agents, which are capable of disrupting migration and invasion in pHGG and DIPG cell lines. Cell migration may be achieved by a set of component processes, which are often regulated by the same effectors regardless of the cell type and the mode of migration. Broadly, these processes are based on polarisation, protrusion and adhesion, translocation of the cell body and retraction of the rear. They are also coordinated and integrated by extensive transient signalling networks (Wehrle-Haller and Imhof, 2003). We therefore investigated the effect of LiCl and BIO on the interaction between the microtubule cytoskeleton, actin skeleton and focal adhesions on two established pHGG cell lines that grow as monolayers. In both pHGG cell lines examined, we observed that microtubules re-localised to the surface of cells. There was a change in the actin cytoskeleton with re-localisation of the actin fibres to the cell periphery and we also noted a change in focal adhesion point turn over and dynamics with a marked re-distribution of focal adhesion points to the cell surface or apparent loss of focal adhesion foci. The cells appeared to be immobilised in response to the loss of polarity, motility and attachment-detachment dynamics, accounting for their inability to migrate. One postulated mechanism for the anti-migratory effects of LiCl and BIO is through GSK-3 inhibition. Glycogen synthase kinase-3 is thought to be involved in the control of cell migration, through its role in regulating cellular structure alongside microtubule and focal adhesion dynamics (Grimes and Jope, 2001;SunNone, 2009). In adult HGG, the effect of LiCl and BIO on migration has previously been investigated and their anti-migratory activity has been attributed to their ability to inhibit GSK-3 and stabilisebeta-catenin via the canonical Wnt signalling pathway (Luo, 2009). In adult glioma models, LiCl has been shown to increasebeta-catenin reporter activity andbeta-catenin knockdown has been demonstrated to rescue the anti-migratory effects of BIO (NowickiNone, 2008;WilliamsNone, 2011). In our study, we examinedbeta-catenin localisation by IF post treatment of pHGG cells with LiCl and BIO, and observed a marked internalisation ofbeta-catenin to the cytoplasm and nucleus following treatment. This observation has also been noted in adult glioma following LiCl and BIO treatment (Williams, 2011) and provides evidence to support the effectiveness of LiCl and BIO as an inhibitor of GSK-3. Furthermore, western blot analysis of our pHGG lines confirmed that LiCl increased Ser9 phosphorylated GSK-3beta(inactivated form) and BIO decreased the activating tyrosine of GSK-3alphabeta. Both LiCl and BIO have potential for clinical application. LiCl has been used to treat psychiatric conditions such as bipolar disorder for many decades (Mitchell, 1999) and BIO is part of the family of indirubins, which have been identified as the active ingredient of the Chinese medicine Danggui Longhui Wan, which has anti-leukemic activity (HoesselNone, 1999). Other GSK-3 inhibitors have been developed and tested in a variety of preclinical studies (MeijerNone, 2004;Eldar-Finkelman and Martinez, 2011), however, current hurdles for the use of such drugs in clinical practice include optimisation of drug delivery and avoidance of toxic systemic accumulation of the drug. In particular, LiCl has a narrow therapeutic window, inducing nephrotoxicity at concentrations greater than 1.5 mMin vivo(NowickiNone, 2008). Although our data detect significant anti-migratory effects on paediatric glioma at concentrations as low as 5 mM, alternative methods of drug delivery such as convection-enhanced delivery or local delivery with polymers may be required to attain localised high concentrations of the drug in human brain tumours (NowickiNone, 2008;Siegal, 2013) and this requires further evaluationin vivowith preclinical models. Alternatively, the development of specific novel GSK-3 inhibitors capable of crossing the blood-brain barrier at concentrations associated with clinically acceptable side effect profiles will help overcome this problem. Finally, owing to the lack of published mouse models of paediatric glioma invasion, we have not been able to address the anti-migratory effects of GSK-3 inhibitorsin vivo. Studies of adult glioma have shown that GSK-3 inhibitors of the indirubin family are able to reduce invasion of glioma cellsin vivo(WilliamsNone, 2011) and development of a paediatric orthotopic xenograft model of migration to test novel GSK-3 inhibitors forms a major part of our ongoing studies in this area. In summary, we have characterised the migratory behaviour of paediatric glioma cell lines in 2D and 3D models and conclude that GSK-3 inhibitors, such as LiCl and BIO, may be novel candidates for migration inhibition in pHGG and DIPG and as such warrant further investigation as therapeutics for this challenging group of tumours.