Several benzoxazocenones (e.g.,1-4, Figure1)Nonehaving novel cellular activities have been discovered using cell-based screening of compounds prepared using diversity-oriented synthesis (DOS). None,NoneOf particular relevance to this study, BRD0476 (3)Noneand quinoline analog BRD1116 (4)Nonerescued INS-1E pancreatic beta-cells from cytokine-induced apoptosis for the potential treatment of type-1 diabetes. Mechanism-of-action studies revealed3and4inhibit the JAK-STAT signaling pathway induced by pro-inflammatory cytokine IFN-gamma. NoneIn an effort to optimize these promising activities, numerous analogs of3and4have been prepared, but structural modifications have been limited to appendingN-alkyl side chain, urea, and sulfonamide moieties. None,NoneIn the present study, we describe a new synthesis of oxazocenones that lack a fused benzene moiety (des-benzo). The route enables the synthesis of analogs that possess changes in the cyclic core scaffold (Figure1). Previously, the benzo-fused 8-membered ring in3and4was constructed using intramolecular nucleophilic aromatic substitution (SNAR) of benzamide6, which was obtained from chiral amine building block7(Scheme1). None,None,NoneWe envisioned that des-benzo congener5may also be derived from7via an analogous 8-endo-dig hydroalkoxylation reaction of alkynamide8a. None,NoneDOS-generated bioactive benzoxazocenones (1-4) and targeted des-benzo framework. Given that increased entropic and enthalpic barriers to cyclization are often associated with formation of medium rings,Nonewe sought a robust method to prepare oxazocenones. Homogeneous gold catalysis has proven useful for synthetic transformations over the past few decades. NoneThe ability of gold to serve as a carbophilic pi Lewis acid to activate unsaturated C-C bonds renders these functionalities including alkynes susceptible to nucleophilic attack. However, there are relatively few examples of 8-endo-dig cyclizations catalyzed by gold, which include cycloisomerizations to indoloazocenes and benzoxocenes reported by the EchavarrenNoneand WaldmannNonelaboratories, respectively. Hydroalkoxylation variantsNoneto form 8-membered heterocycles have yet to be demonstrated, though gold(I) salts were serendipitously discovered by Van der Eycken et al. to catalyze an analogous 7-endo-dig hydroalkoxylation of an alkynamide. NoneHere, we describe the extension of this methodology to the development of a gold(I)-catalyzed 8-endo-dig hydroalkoxylation to form oxazocenones en route to5. We initiated our synthetic studies toward oxazocenone5from known 4-((tert-butyldimethylsilyl)oxy)-2-butynoic acid9(11) and chiral amine7(3) (Scheme2). Acid9was chosen as a suitable building block to incorporate an alcohol as a functional group handle for installation of the urea moiety of5at a late stage in the synthesis (vide infra). Upon screening several reagents and conditions, we found that HATU-mediated amide coupling of9and7in MeCN at 0 degrees C provided alkynamide10in satisfactory yield (Scheme2). Desilylation (TBAF) afforded deprotected substrate8afor evaluation of the gold(I)-catalyzed 8-endo-dig hydroalkoxylation reaction. Intramolecular hydroalkoxylation of8ausing catalytic Ph3PAuCl (5 mol %) and AgSbF6(5 mol %) provided the desired 8-endo-dig oxazocenone product11ain CH2Cl2at rt (entry 1, Table1). In addition to11a, formation of oxazepanone12awas also observed under these conditions, likely resulting from a competitive 7-exo-dig cyclization. The ratio of products11aand12awas determined to be 1.7:1 by1H NMR analysis of the crude reaction mixture. Cyclization to these heterocycles was confirmed by key HMBC correlations between the C(3) and H(4) atoms as well as the C(2) and H(3) atoms for11aand12a, respectively. The products could be further distinguished by their NMR spectra. In particular, the signal in the1H NMR spectrum for the vinylic proton in11aexisted as a singlet, whereas this signal in12aexhibited additional splitting due to the adjacent methylene group. Endocyclic olefins in 8-membered heterocycles can exist in bothEandZconfigurations. NoneA weak NOE signal was detected between the vinylic C(2) and methylene C(3') protons in11a, suggesting preference for theZgeometry. Although no confirmatory NOE correlations were observed for oxazepanone12a, we expect thatanti-addition of the alcohol to the alkyne, by analogy to the olefin geometry found in11a, would provide the exocyclic olefin in theZconfiguration. Reactions were monitored by LCMS. Product ratio determined by1H NMR analysis of the crude reaction mixture. Combined isolated yields of11aand12aafter column chromatography unless otherwise noted. Isolated yield of11a. Starting material was recovered. Yield determined by1H NMR analysis using toluene as an internal standard. Partial conversion of starting material was observed. We next turned our attention to increasing the selectivity for formation of oxazocenone11a. Changing the silver additive to AgOTf increased the ratio to 2.8:1 (entry 2, Table1). This result suggests that the gold complex generatedin situmay have increased cationic character, activating the alkynamide for oxa-Michael addition by the alcohol and leading to shorter reaction times (entries 2-4). Tuning the ligand also enhanced the cationic character of the gold complex. For example, adding electronegative groups to the aryl moieties of phosphine ligands increased selectivities (entries 3 and 4), in which (C6F5)3PAuClNoneprovided a 6.2:1 ratio to give an optimal yield (77%) for11a(entry 4). Although 5 mol % AgOTf alone catalyzed the reaction with high selectivity for11a,Nonelow conversion and isolated yields were observed (entry 6). NoneFurthermore, (C6F5)3PAuCl or TfOH, which is often the active catalyst for reactions using metal triflates,Noneby itself did not provide conversion to11aor12a(entries 5 and 7, respectively). Taken together, these control experiments suggest that (C6F5)3PAu+is the cationic species activating alkynamide8afor intramolecular hydroalkoxylation. Exemplifying the mildness and utility of this reaction, base-mediated cyclization to11aunder dissociative anion conditions (e.g., KOt-Bu/18-crown-6 orn-BuLi/HMPA)None,None,Nonewas not achieved. Having optimized conditions for a highly complex alkynamide, we next determined the generality and scope of the gold(I)-catalyzed hydroalkylation reaction to oxazocenones (Scheme3). Surprisingly, simplified alkynamide8b, which lacks substituents on theN-alkyl groups but retains the propargylic alcohol, cyclized to oxazocenone11bwithout observation of theexobyproduct12b. On the other hand, TBS-protected alkynamide8cprovided oxazocenone11calong with small amounts of 7-exo-dig product12c(11:1endotoexoselectivity determined by1H NMR analysis of the crude reaction mixture). Other substitutions at the propargylic position provided selective formation of oxazocenones. For example, methyl- and phenyl-substituted oxazocenones11dand11ewere synthesized in good yields at 79% and 84%, respectively. Alkynamides with various substituents (R3) on theN-alkyl group bearing the nucleophilic alcohol were also tolerated for the reaction. Oxazocenones11fand11gwith substitutions at the C(5)- and C(4)-positions, respectively, were selectively formed in good yields. Although a slower reaction time for conversion to11f(24 h) versus11e(6.5 h) seems counterintuitive, "reverse"gem-disubstitution effects have previously been shown for formation of medium rings. NoneDemonstrating that sterically hindered tertiary alcohols are suitable for cyclization, geminal dimethyl-substituted oxazocenone11hwas prepared in moderate yield. Unfortunately, aryl substitution (R2) of the amide produced11iin low yield (20%), demonstrating a limitation of this reaction. Poor yields were also observed for substrates containing a secondary amide or a terminal alkyne (not shown). The structural and olefin-geometry assignment of oxazocenones formed during the gold(I)-catalyzed cyclization were confirmed by the X-ray crystal structures of11b,11e,11h, and11i. Reaction times and isolated yields are given with ratios of11to12in parentheses. Reaction was performed using 10 mol % (C6F5)3PAuCl and 10 mol % AgOTf. Reaction was performed using 5 mol % (C6F5)3PAuCl and 5 mol % AgOTf. The mechanism accounting for selective 8-endo-dig cyclizations to oxazocenones may exploit dual pi and sigma Lewis acid propertiesNoneof (C6F5)3PAu+. Activation of the amide carbonyl with the Au(I) catalyst likely significantly promotes oxa-Michael addition in the hydroalkoxylation reaction of8(Scheme4). Additionally, bidendate coordinationNonewith the alkyne may provide activated speciesA. This mode of coordination may polarize the alkyne in a manner to favor cyclization of the alcohol to provide 8-endo-dig adductB. The findings that propargyl alcohol8bdoes not afford oxazepanone products whereas TBS-protected congener8cand complex alkynamide8ado suggest that the 8-endoand 7-exoreaction pathways are not influenced by coordination of the propargylic alcohol of alkynamides with the gold(I) complex. The oxazepanone byproducts more likely arise from steric interactions imparted by substituents appended to the product heterocycles. After cyclization to intermediateB, protodeauration would then provide oxazocenones11with regeneration of the gold(I) catalyst. Having developed a method to access oxazocenones, we next assessed the ability of oxazocenone11ato be elaborated to des-benzo analog5(Scheme5). A synthesis of5was initiated by conversion of the primary alcohol of11ato an azide using diphenylphosphoryl azide (DPPA) to afford13in excellent yield (98%). The incorporated azide masks a primary amine needed to install the requisite urea moiety. Prior to urea formation,13was converted to sulfonamide17in three steps. To circumvent nonselective deprotection of thep-methoxybenzyl (PMB) ether under acidic conditions, the Boc-carbamate was cleaved by first subjecting13totert-butyldimethylsilyl triflate (TBSOTF) to provideN-silylcarbamate14, which was then desilylated (TBAF) with decarboxylation to secondary crude amine15. NoneSubsequent capping with 1,4-benzodioxan-6-sulfonyl chloride16gave sulfonamide17. Staudinger reduction (Ph3P, H2O) of17to primary amine18, followed by treatment with diphosgene (ClCO2CCl3), afforded isocyanate19. This intermediate serves as a branching point to various urea derivatives, whereas, in this work, addition of 8-aminoquinoline20yielded PMB-protected des-benzo congener21in 80% yield from18in two steps. Deprotection of the PMB ether under oxidative conditions (e.g., DDQ) gave low yields of des-benzo congener5, in which byproducts resulting from allylic oxidation were observed. NoneAlternatively, acid-mediated cleavage of the PMB ether with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) proceeded efficiently (72% yield) to complete the synthesis of5. The structure of5was assigned using X-ray crystallographic structure determination. In summary, we have described the development of a gold(I)-catalyzed 8-endo-dig hydroalkoxylation of alkynamides to form oxazocenones. This novel method was applied to a substrate with high structural complexity to obtain5, a des-benzo analog of a previously described bioactive benzoxazocenone generated by diversity-oriented synthesis. Biological evaluation of5is underway, and we are currently investigating the application of the optimized gold(I)-catalyzed conditions to access additional heterocyclic scaffolds.