Enantioselective Michael addition of lithium enolates is a process of significant utility. From simple precursors, this reaction has the potential to generate multiple consecutive stereocenters that are difficult to access by other methods. There has been considerable progress in methodology that has tapped into this potential,None,Noneincluding several methods based on covalent chiral auxiliaries. None,NoneAsymmetric transformations with lithium enolates derived from carboxylic acids are performed predominantly with covalently attached chiral auxiliaries. These reactions provide a broad arsenal of methods for enantioselective synthesis and are indispensable in the synthesis of many complex natural products and pharmaceuticals. NoneWe recently reported that high enantioselectivities could be achieved in thedirectone-step alkylation of arylacetic acids using chiral lithium amides. NoneIn this process, the chiralC2-symmetric dilithium amide functions as a chiral auxiliary within a mixed enediolate-dilithium amide aggregate formed in situ,Nonethus bypassing the additional steps required to attach and remove covalently bound chiral auxiliaries. X-ray crystallography,6Li,13C, and15N NMR spectroscopy, and DFT calculations pointed to the structure of the aggregate depicted in Scheme1. None,NoneWe describe herein a direct enantioselective Michael addition of carboxylic acids via enediolates mediated by chiral lithium amides (Scheme1). None-NoneThe reaction occurs with high stereocontrol in both the relative and absolute sense, further highlighting the utility of chiral lithium amides as traceless auxiliaries for asymmetric synthesis. The addition of phenylacetic acid to alkyl cinnamates and methyl (E)-3-cyclohexylacrylate in the presence of dilithium amides from chiralC2-symmetric tetraminesNoneTA-NoneTAwas investigated first (Table1). NoneFrom the onset, the reactions were characterized by facile, highly anti-selective 1,4-additions with high conversions at -78 degrees C.NonePiperidine-based tetramine (R)-NoneTA,Nonewhich was previously shown to be highly effective in asymmetric alkylations of arylacetic acids, again proved to be optimal (88% yield, greater than 30:1 dr, 83% ee; entry 1). One of the most striking observations is that a seemingly minor adjustment in the structure of the base, i.e., replacing the piperidine unit with pyrrolidine as in (R)-NoneTA, resulted inreversalof the enantiomeric preference, giving the opposite enantiomerent-3as the major product with 84% ee and 17:1 dr (entry 2). The previously reported alkylation reaction showed the same sense of enantiofacial preferences for these two bases. NoneThe azepine base also displayed a reversal of selectivity, although at a lower level (46% ee; entry 3). Introduction of thegem-dimethyl substitution on the propylene bridge in (R)-NoneTAgave a diminished yield of the product with lower diastereoselectivity (entry 4). Replacing the phenyl group with 2-naphthyl ((R)-NoneTA) had a minor impact on the course of the reaction. The ee values were measured using chiral HPLC analysis of methyl esters after derivatization with Me3SiCHN2; all results are corrected to bases with theRconfiguration. Addition at -90 degrees C.26 mmol scale, 5.97 g of3; (R)-NoneTAwas recovered in 99% yield. Variations in the ester group revealed that the enantioselectivity was higher for methyl cinnamate (1, R = Me) than for ethyl andtert-butyl cinnamate. Under optimal conditions, the addition product was formed in 88% yield with 93% ee as a single diastereomer (Table1, entry 8). A larger-scale experiment was performed at -78 degrees C on 26 mmol scale, affording 5.97 g of3(R = CH3) in 78% yield with 90% ee (entry 13). The product was isolated as a single diastereomer by recrystallization, and the reagent (R)-NoneTAwas recovered by extraction in 99% yield. Similar selectivity trends were observed with methyl (E)-3-cyclohexylacrylate (2) (Table1, entries 9-12). In this case, the pyrrolidine base (R)-NoneTAproved to be significantly more effective, giving adduct4in 74% isolated yield with 96% ee as a single anti diastereomer (cf. entries 9 and 10). The absolute and relative configurations of addition products3and4were established using X-ray crystallographic analysis as well as correlation with known compounds. NoneGuided by the initial experiments, we selected the piperidine base (R)-NoneTAand the pyrrolidine base (R)-NoneTAfor further investigations. The scope of Michael acceptors was examined first (Table2). In all of the examples, ?1:1 stoichiometry between the Michael donor and acceptor was applied. Many aryl and heteroaryl substituents were suitable for the reaction using the piperidine base (R)-NoneTA. The diastereoselectivity was uniformly high for all of the alpha,beta-unsaturated esters ( greater than 20:1), and the enantioselectivity was in the range of 69-97% ee, with the highest value observed for products5aand5fbearing 2-methoxyphenyl and 3-indolyl groups, respectively. The 3-nitroaryl substituent (5c) afforded a much lower yield of the addition product, likely because of the high reactivity of the substrate; however, high enantioselectivity was maintained. In our screening efforts, we placed an emphasis on heteroaryl substituents because of their relevance to medicinal chemistry (5d-i). Although the enantioselectivity was somewhat reduced, it was in the practical range of 70-97% ee for a variety of groups, includingN-methyl-2-pyrrolyl (5d, 86% ee), 2-benzofuryl (5e, 73% ee),N-Boc-3-indolyl (5f, 97% ee), 2-furyl (5g, 85% ee), 3,5-dimethyl-4-isoxazolyl (5h, 86% ee), and 2-thiazolyl (5i), which gave the lowest ee of 69%. Notably, the potentially sensitiveN-Boc group in5fwas compatible with the reaction conditions; in fact, this was one of the best-performing reactions. (R)-NoneTAas the base. (R)-NoneTAas the base. All results are normalized to bases with theRconfiguration; ee values were determined by HPLC analyses of methyl esters. On the basis of the preliminary studies, aliphatic alpha,beta-unsaturated esters were studied with both chiral bases, (R)-NoneTAand (R)-NoneTA(Table2). With crotonates (5j,5k), we found that the best enantioselectivity of 78% was obtained with thetert-butyl ester using the original piperidine base (R)-NoneTA. For all of the other substrates except for methyl 4,4,4-trifluorocrotonate (5p, 58% ee), the enantioselectivity was superior with (R)-NoneTA. Ethyl (5l), isopropyl (5m), isobutyl (5n), cyclopropyl (5o), and (4-methoxyphenyloxy)methyl (5q) substituents were effectively introduced. The enantioselectivities were in the range of 85-90%, except for5q, which was isolated with 66% ee. Under the conditions studied, no reactivity was observed with sterically demanding methyl (E)-4,4-dimethylpent-2-enoate (cf. 5rin Table2). The scope of carboxylic acids investigated as Michael donors with the piperidine base (R)-NoneTAis summarized in Table3. Initially, variation of the position of the chlorine on the phenyl ring revealed that ortho substitution resulted in a drastic reduction of enantioselectivity. While 4- and 3-chlorophenylacetic acid afforded addition products with 93 and 86% ee, respectively, 33% ee was observed with 2-chlorophenylacetic acid. The selectivity could be substantially improved to 70% ee by using the alternative base (R)-NoneTA(6c). Again, the enantiomeric product was favored. Similar trends were observed for 2- and 3-naphthylacetic acid (6e,6f). The former afforded the addition product with 87% ee, while the selectivity with the latter was 33% ee, which could be enhanced to -79% ee using (R)-NoneTA. 2-(Benzo[d]dioxol-5-yl)acetic acid afforded6dwith 89% ee. (R)-NoneTAas the base. (R)-NoneTAas the base. All results are normalized to bases with theRconfiguration; ee values were determined by HPLC analyses of methyl esters. For the dimethyl ester. The heteroarylacetic acids 2-thiophene- and 3-furanacetic acid afforded6gand6hwith high enantioselectivity (Table3). AlthoughN-Boc-3-indoleacetic acid proved to be a poor substrate in the addition reaction,N-benzyl-3-indoleacetic acid afforded6iin a very high yield with 76% ee. Improved selectivity was observed with (R)-NoneTAas the base, which again afforded the product with the opposite sense of enantioinduction. Although a systematic study of aliphatic carboxylic acids as Michael donors was beyond the scope of this contribution, addition of 4-phenylbutyric acid was an important initial advance in this direction (6j; Table3). In contrast to our previous work on alkylation reactions, a rather high ee of 80% (dr 4:1) was observed with (R)-NoneTAas the base. Studies of enediolates from aliphatic acids continue and will be reported in due course. Variation in both coupling partners using more functionalized substrates is tolerated (6k). The versatility of the Michael addition methodology is illustrated by the applications depicted in Scheme2. The first application capitalized on the reactivity of the initially formed enolate by exploiting it in a secondary alkylation reaction with iodomethane in one pot. This process enabled the formation of three consecutive tertiary stereocenters with excellent stereocontrol in 74% yield (Scheme2a). The free carboxyl group is an exceptionally convenient surrogate for an amino group via the Curtius rearrangement transform. In the event, treatment of acid7with diphenylphosphoryl azide followed by benzyl alcohol delivered gamma-amino acid derivative8in 53% unoptimized yield. The second application was the enantioselective synthesis of the purported structure of pulveraven B (9) (Scheme2b), reported as a constituent of the edible mushroomPulveroboletus raveneliiin 2003. NoneIt displayed selective inhibition of carcinogen-induced pre-neoplastic lesion formation in mouse mammary organ culture with IC50= 0.8 muM. The potency was reduced 10-fold for its epimer pulveraven A. In the synthesis described herein, the initial Michael adduct was subjected in situ to aldol coupling with 3-phenyl-2-propynal, affording a 2:1 mixture of aldol products11with 86% ee for both diastereomers (83% yield). After cleavage of the trimethylsilylethyl ester withn-Bu4NF, a Ag-catalyzed cyclization afforded gamma-lactone12. NoneOxidation delivered the tetronic acid with a structure proposed for pulveraven B. However, the optical rotation and NMR spectral data did not match those reported for the natural product. NoneIn conclusion, we have developed a method for direct enantio- and diastereoselective conjugate addition of carboxylic acids to alpha,beta-unsaturated esters. The stereoselectivity is imparted by a chiral lithium amide-enediolate aggregate formed from chiralC2-symmetric Koga-type tetramines. The study revealed intriguing and unexpected patterns of stereoselectivty that are the subject of current mechanistic investigations. NoneMultiple selective bond formations were illustrated (1) by a highly stereoselective one-pot alkylation with iodomethane and (2) by an aldol coupling within the context of the enantioselective total synthesis of pulveraven B, which revealed that its structure appears to be misassigned.