Acute lung injury (ALI), now referred to as 'mild acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS)' [1], is common in the critical care setting. Neuropsychiatric morbidities are prevalent and long-lasting in survivors of critical illness [2]. With a growing number of ALI survivors, more effort is being directed toward understanding and improving the long-term physical, cognitive, and psychiatric morbidities experienced by these survivors. The Fluid and Catheter Treatment Trial (FACTT) suggested short-term physiologic benefit from a conservative fluid management strategy when compared with a liberal fluid management strategy, as evidenced by improved lung function and shorter duration of mechanical ventilation [3,4]. In the FACTT, the conservative strategy group had better lung injury scores and oxygenation indices as well as lower plateau pressures and positive end-expiratory pressures. However, there was no difference in hospital mortality at 60 days between the two treatment groups. As a concurrent study to the FACTT, the ALI Cognitive Outcomes Study (ACOS) demonstrated a high incidence of cognitive impairment and psychiatric symptoms in long-term survivors of ALI. Fifty-five percent of patients had cognitive impairment on neuropsychological testing. However, cognitive impairment was significantly more common in the fluid conservative arm (P = 0.005), particularly in executive dysfunction domains (such as planning a trip or balancing a checkbook). In the ACOS, enrollment in the conservative fluid management strategy (P = 0.004) and lower partial pressure of arterial oxygen (P = 0.02) were associated with cognitive impairment at 12 months, suggesting that the short-term benefits achieved as a result of a conservative fluid strategy might come at the cost of long-term cognitive dysfunction. The results of this study illustrate that physiologic outcomes are not necessarily associated with patient-centered outcomes. The ACOS is the first study to determine whether neuropsychological function can be assessed in a multicenter trial. It is also the first large-scale assessment of a previously validated telephone-administered neuropsychological instrument. However, one weakness of the study is its small sample size, a consequence of high patient attrition and low telephone enrollment. Several possible explanations account for this lack of follow-up. For instance, the subject may have been lost to follow-up because of death, known as a competing risk. It is also possible that the subject was lost to follow-up because of neurocognitive deficits, known as informative censoring. Although bias from pre-study cognitive baseline should have been addressed by randomization, unmeasured differences could have resulted in differential attrition between study arms. Non-informative censoring, or random loss to follow-up, is another potential explanation for the high patient attrition in this study. Consistent with previous studies, the ACOS showed neurocognitive deficits in a large proportion of subjects recovering from ARDS (55% of patients had cognitive impairment on neuropsychiatric testing). Future studies should incorporate more long-term follow-up, as benefits of intensive care unit interventions observed during the early part of recovery from critical illness may not translate into improvement in long-term outcomes. ACOS: Acute Lung Injury Cognitive Outcomes Study; ALI: acute lung injury; ARDS: acute respiratory distress syndrome; FACTT: Fluid and Catheter Treatment Trial. The authors declare that they have no competing interests.