A fundamental property of all cells is their ability to adapt and survive despite variation in environmental conditions. Minimising errors in the conformational integrity of proteins, vital to the functioning of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), is achieved via the unfolded protein response (UPR); this homeostatic mechanism is induced by ER stress resulting from any disruption to protein production, folding or degradation. The ER-resident protein, glucose regulated protein 78 (GRP78), functions as a sensory hub and is present as complexes with three proteins: the protein kinase-like ER kinase (PERK or eukaryotic initiation factor 2 alpha kinase 3), inositol-requiring element 1 (IRE1) and activating transcription factor 6 (ATF6) (Schroder, 2005,2006). Glucose regulated protein 78 also possesses high affinity for hydrophobic or hydrophilic regions exposed on the surface of unfolded or misfolded protein substrates; these interactions can be modulated by the binding of ADP and ATP to an N-terminal ATP-binding domain, and result in dissociation and activation of PERK, IRE1 and ATF6 (BertolottiNone, 2000;ShenNone, 2002). Dissociation of ATF6 facilitates Golgi-mediated processing of ATF6 to an active transcription factor; the dissociation of PERK and the endoribonuclease precursor IRE1 from GRP78 allows oligomerisation and auto-phosphorylation to form active kinases (Schroder and Kaufman, 2005;Schroder, 2005,2006). Protein kinase-like ER kinase, IRE1 and ATF6 are key UPR regulators that initiate downstream responses of ER stress including the cessation of cap-dependent mRNA translation, the induction of chaperones to assist in protein folding and the induction of apoptosis via activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) and GADD153/CHOP (BlaisNone, 2004). The expression of GRP78 may be enhanced in metastatic cells and late-stage tumours, and its role as an ER stress sensor suggests that it may be useful as a therapeutic target (Lee, 2007;MartinNone, 2010). Although siRNA-mediated knockdown of GRP78 increases cell deathin vitro(VirreyNone, 2008), this may be difficult to achievein vivoand alternative approaches to inhibiting GRP78 may be more effective as therapeutic strategies. The N-terminal ATPase domain important to GRP78 function also forms complexes with procaspases thus preventing caspase activation; this interaction can be abrogated with dATP to increase drug-induced cell death (RaoNone, 2002;ReddyNone, 2003). Treatment with nucleoside analogues that bind to the ATPase domain and facilitate dissociation of GRP78/procaspase complexes and disrupt the ability of GRP78 to bind/release substrates may, therefore, be a useful strategy to inhibit GRP78. Additional approaches may be to use natural inhibitors, such as the Green TeaC. sinensisflavonoid epigallocatechin gallate (EGCG) (ErmakovaNone, 2006) or cytotoxin-mediated cleavage by AB5Subtilase (SubAB5) (PatonNone, 2006;Paton and Paton, 2010). Epigallocatechin gallate blocks the ATPase domain of GRP78 (ErmakovaNone, 2006) and enhances cell death in response to temozolamide or etoposide (VirreyNone, 2008). Epigallocatechin gallate also inhibits the 26S proteasome and NFkappaB signalling cascade and, while clearly not specific to GRP78, may be a candidate drug to overcome chemoresistance in solid tumours (NamNone, 2001;ErmakovaNone, 2006). There may be other natural products that could be used to inhibit GRP78. Honokiol (2-(4-hydroxy-3-prop-2-enyl-phenyl)-4-prop-2-enyl-phenol) (HNK), a cell-wall component ofM. grandiflora,is a potent antitumorigenic and neurotrophic compound (ChenNone, 2010), which induces apoptosis as a result of ER stress in chondrosarcoma cells with the concomitant upregulation of GRP78. Unpublished proteomic data have suggested that HNK binds to GRP78 and the aim of this study was to investigate the binding of HNK and EGCG to GRP78, and characterise the effect of these as single agents on neuroectodermal tumour cells and in combination with two drugs, fenretinide and bortezomib, known to induce ER stress-induced cell death. CHL-1 and WM266-4 (ATCC # CRL-9446, CRL-1676) human melanoma and U251 and MO59J human glioblastoma cell lines were cultured in high glucose (4.5 g l-1) DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS (Sigma-Aldrich, Poole, UK). SH-SY5Y and NGP human neuroblastoma cell lines were cultured in RPMI-1640 medium (Sigma-Aldrich) supplemented with 10% FBS. Murine SVR angiosarcoma cells (ArbiserNone, 1997) were cultured in DMEM/10% FBS. Cells were maintained at 37 degrees C in a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2in air to a maximum of 50 passages. The coding sequence of murine GRP78 lacking the signal peptide was synthesised by Blue Heron Biotech LLC (Bothell, WA, USA) and subcloned into 5'Nde1 and 3'BamH1 sites of theE. coliexpression vector pET15b to produce plasmid pMUT177. The amino-acid sequences of the nucleotide-binding domains (NBDs) of murine and human GRP78 differ by a single substitution. The complete amino-acid sequence of the GRP78 encoded by pMUT177 is shown inSupplementary Figure 1. Glucose regulated protein 78 was overproduced inE. coliand purified as described previously (LambNone, 2006) but with additional chromatographic purification through hydroxyapatite: protein in 50 mM K phosphate pH 7.2, 1 mM DTT was loaded onto a hydroxyapatite column, washed with buffer to remove unbound protein and GRP78 eluted with a linear gradient of 50-400 mM K phosphate pH 7.2, 1 mM DTT. The methodology and rationale for DSC and ITC analysis are summarised inLambNone(2006)and references contained within. Although some GRP78 molecules may have nucleotide bound at the end of the purification, this will be released from the protein before the protein unfolding (Cooper, 2001). Biotinylation of HNK was achieved by incubating 0.187 mmol of HNK in a dry round-bottomed flask, containing 5 ml of chloroform and 1 ml of dimethylformamide, with 0.375 mmol of pentafluorophenyl-biotin at 40 degrees C with stirring for 30 min, and then 1 h at room temperature. Chloroform and pentafluorophenol were removed at 33 degrees C by rotary evaporation, and the solid dried under high vacuum overnight. SVR angiosarcoma cells were washed in 10 ml Dulbecco's phosphate-buffered solution, trypsinised in 1 ml trypsin-EDTA (0.05% trypsin and 0.53 mM EDTA), resuspended in 10 ml DMEM and pelleted by centrifugation. Whole-protein isolates were obtained by resuspending the cells in 20 mM Tris HCl (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 1% (v/v) Triton X-100, 10% glycerol, 1 mM EDTA, 10 mug ml-1leupeptin, 10 mug ml-1aprotinin, 1 mM benzamidine, 1 mM PMSF and 1 mM Na3VO4, followed by centrifugation at 15 000 r.p.m. in an Eppendorf (Hauppauge, NY, USA) 5415C microcentrifuge. Approximately 1 mg of protein was incubated with biotinylated HNK for 3 h at 37 degrees C and the mixture incubated with 150 mul of M-270 Streptavidin beads (Dynal Biotech, Invitrogen, Grand Island, NY, USA) for 2 h at 37 degrees C. Beads were collected using a magnetic field, washed three times with PBS and proteins eluted by denaturation at 100 degrees C for 10 min followed by centrifugation at 13 000 r.p.m. Thirty microlitre of the eluate was analysed on a 10% Tris-SDS polyacrylamide gel, and bands were excised and digested overnight with Trypsin at 37 degrees C. Peptides were extracted, desalted (50% of sample) using C18 ZipTip (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA) and analysed using an Ultimate nano HPLC LC-MS/MS (Dionex/LC Packings, CA, USA) with a FAMOS autosampler and SWITCHOS column switcher for online desalting, interfaced to a QSTAR XL mass spectrometer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). Elution from the column was accomplished with an acetonitrile gradient from 2-80% with 0.1% formic acid as a counter ion for HPLC. The flow rate was 275 nl min-1. MS/MS data were processed by MASCOT using the SwissPROT database using mammals as a limit on the species. Ion scores were calculated as -10*Log(P), wherePis the probability that the observed match is a random event. Individual ion scores greater than 33 indicate an identity or an extensive homology. Only proteins with ProtScore greater than 1.0 ( greater than 85% confidence) were considered. EGCG and HNK were added to cell cultures, alone or in combination with the ER stress inducers fenretinide or bortezomib, dissolved in an appropriate vehicle (?0.01% of culture volume); an equal volume of vehicle was used to treat control cells. Epigallocatechin gallate (Sigma-Aldrich) was dissolved in PBS; HNK (Sigma-Aldrich) and bortezomib (Velcade; Millenium, Janssen-Cilag Ltd, High Wycombe, UK) were dissolved in DMSO; and fenretinide (Janssen-Cilag Ltd, Zug, Switzerland) was dissolved in ethanol. In combination experiments, for melanoma and glioblastoma cell lines, fenretinide and bortezomib were used over concentration ranges of 1-20 muM and 0.01-0.4 muM, respectively, with ratios of 1 : 1 for fenretinide with EGCG, 1 : 5 for fenretinide with HNK, 1 : 50 for bortezomib with EGCG and 1 : 250 for bortezomib with HNK. Neuroblastoma cell lines were more sensitive to these drugs, and fenretinide and bortezomib were used at concentration ranges of 1-10 muM and 0.01-0.04 muM, respectively, with ratios of 1 : 2 for fenretinide with EGCG, 1 : 10 for fenretinide with HNK, 1 : 500 for bortezomib with EGCG and 1 : 2500 for bortezomib with HNK. Cells were seeded into 6-well plates (Corning; Sigma-Aldrich) at densities of 1.5 * 105(CHL-1), 2.0 * 105(U251, MO59J, SH-SY5Y and NGP) or 2.5 * 105(WM266-4) cells per well and attached overnight at 37 degrees C. After treatment, cells and supernatant were harvested and analysed by flow cytometry as described previously (MartinNone, 2010) using either FACScan or FACScalibur flow cytometers (Becton Dickinson Immunocytometry Systems, Oxford, UK) to determine the percentage of cells with hypodiploid DNA (subG1 peak) as a measure of cell death. CellTiter 96 Aqueous One Solution Reagent (Promega, Southampton, UK; MTS assay) was used to measure viability of 5000 cells per well in flat-bottomed 96-well tissue culture plates after treatment for 24 h according to the manufacturer's instructions. Epigallocatechin gallate is auto-fluorescent at the wavelength used for CellTiter 96 Aqueous One Solution reagent (490 nm), and the Sulphorodamine B colorimetric cytotoxicity assay (SRB assay; (HaselsbergerNone, 1996)) was used instead. Proteins were extracted from cell pellets, quantified using Bradford assay reagent (Pierce Biotech., Rockford, IL, USA), separated by electrophoresis through 4-20% Tris-glycine polyacrylamide gels (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hemel Hempstead, UK) and blotted as described previously (ArmstrongNone, 2010). Blots were probed with antibodies, diluted in 5% non-fat milk (in TBS/Tween) to appropriate concentrations, for either 1 h at room temperature or 4 degrees C overnight (ArmstrongNone, 2010). Antibodies were for the GRP78 C-Terminus (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Heidelberg, Germany; 1 : 1000 dilution), ATF4 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology; 1 : 500 dilution), Cleaved Caspase 3 (Cell Signalling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA; 1 : 500 dilution) andbeta-actin (Sigma-Aldrich; 1 : 5000 dilution). Detection and visualisation was by horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibodies (Upstate Biotechnology, Boston, MA, USA; diluted 1 : 2000) and the ECL-plus system (Amersham Biosciences, Little Chalfont, UK) with imaging on a Fujifilm FLA-3000 fluorescence imager (Raytek Scientific Ltd, Sheffield, UK). Densitometric quantification of signal intensity relative to thebeta-actin loading control was performed using Aida Image Analyser version 3.28 software (Raytek Scientific Ltd.). Results were expressed as the mean of individual experiments+/-95% confidence intervals (95% CI) using Prism 5 (GraphPad Software Inc., La Jolla, CA, USA) or Sigma Plot 11 (Systat Software Inc., San Jose, CA, USA) software. Responses were compared by one- or two-way ANOVA with either Dunnett's or Bonferroni'spost-hoctests using Prism 5 or SPSS release 17.0 (IBM, Chicago, IL, USA) software. To analyse the synergistic effects of fenretinide and bortezomib alone or in combination with GRP78 inhibitors on induction of cell apoptosis or inhibition of cell viability, combination indices (ci) were generated using CalcuSyn software (Biosoft, Cambridge, UK) as previously described (CorazzariNone, 2003) and used to assess whether drug combinations were additive (ci?1), inhibitory (ci 1) or synergistic (ci 1) with respect to cell death. Combination index data were ranked and analysed using R (R Development Core Team, 2012), initially with linear models to test for the effect of drug dose (not significant;P greater than 0.05) and then by nested ANOVA (cell line nested within cell type); pairwise comparisons of mean ci by cell line or cell type (depending on the results from the nested ANOVA) were carried out using Tukeys HSD after one-way ANOVA. Q-Q plots were used to assess the fit of residuals from the models. Interpretation of dose-response curves for estimation of EC50and asymptote were carried out using R and the package drc (Ritz and Streibig, 2005). EGCG-Sepharose 4B affinity chromatography experiments with a nested set of overlapping N-terminally deleted GRP78 proteins have implied that EGCG binds to the NBD within GRP78 (ErmakovaNone, 2006). In the current work, affinity separation experiments with biotinylated HNK resulted in the identification of GRP78 as a component of murine SVR angiosarcoma cells, which bound HNK; MASCOT alignment showed local sequence matches to GRP78 with ion scores 47, 55 and 73, respectively. The protein score, derived from the ion scores as a non-probabilistic basis for ranking protein hits, was 175. Peptides corresponding to the HSP-70 isoform 1, a protein with extensive homology to GRP78, three keratins and a calreticulin-binding and neural-survival protein DSEP were also identified (Table 1). Using DSC, we have shown previously that GRP78 unfolds in two thermal transitions, the first corresponding to the NBD and the second to the substrate-binding domain (SBD) (LambNone, 2006). To characterise the binding of EGCG and HNK to GRP78, DSC was used to unfold GRP78 in the absence and presence of EGCG (0.2 and 1.0 mM) or HNK (0.1 mM and 0.2 mM;Figure 1). In each case, EGCG and HNK bound with the greatest affinity to the NBD as judged by the relative changes in the melting temperature (Tm) of the NBD and SBD domains (Figure 1;Table 2). The changes in Tm were negative, implying that EGCG and HNK were bound to the unfolded form of GRP78. This interpretation was tested directly by ITC experiments at 25 degrees C where the titration of 1 mM HNK or EGCG into 35 muM GRP78 gave no significant heat exchanges above background heat of dilution (data not shown) implying no binding to folded GRP78. As thermal transitions in the DSC experiments are not reversible, binding data cannot be deconvoluted to derive binding constants. However, DSC data for EGCG and HNK were consistent with the interpretation that HNK has a relatively greater affinity for GRP78 than does EGCG. EGCG has been reported to bind to several proteins (cited inErmakovaNone(2006)); therefore, we used DSC withEscherichia coliDnaK (a member of the HSP-70 chaperone family that includes GRP78), human thymidylate kinase andAspergillus nidulansNmrA (an NAD-binding transcription repressor involved in nitrogen metabolism) (StammersNone, 2001;LambNone, 2003;ZhaoNone, 2010) to test the possibility that HNK is promiscuous with respect to protein-binding activity. In all cases tested, HNK preferentially bound to the unfolded form of the protein as demonstrated by the reduction in the Tm of the thermal transitions in the presence of HNK (Figure 2in theSupplementary Material). Thus, HNK is promiscuous in its ability to bind to unfolded proteins but the differential lowering of the Tm for the GRP78 NBD and SBD (seeTable 2) seen when GRP78 is unfolded in the presence of HNK implies a range of affinities for different amino-acid sequences. Fenretinide and bortezomib induce ER stress leading to cell death, mediated by ATF4 induction, in neuroectodermal tumour cells (ArmstrongNone, 2010). Using a panel of neuroectodermal tumour cells (CHL-1 and WM266-4 melanoma; U251 and MO59J glioblastoma; and NGP and SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma), we investigated the properties of EGCG and HNK with respect to the induction of cell death and inhibition of viability in comparison with fenretinide and bortezomib. All four compounds induced cell death to varying degrees (Figure 2). While EGCG was relatively consistent in producing sigmoidal dose-response curves for cell death, the dose-response kinetics for HNK varied between cell types (Figure 2). In addition, HNK produced marked hormetic responses (stimulation of cell growth at low doses) on cell viability in all cell lines, which were not apparent with EGCG. The half-maximal effective concentrations (EC50) and maximal level of cell death (asymptote) for each compound are summarised inTable 3. With respect to EC50, sensitivity to each drug was cell-line specific, with neuroblastoma cells (NGP and SH-SY5Y) the most sensitive compared with the melanoma or glioblastoma cells. Across cell lines, EC50 values for HNK ranged from 15-56 muM; for EGCG EC50 values ranged from 4.6-51 muM but there was less consistency within cell types (melanoma, glioblastoma and neuroblastoma) compared with HNK. Asymptotes of the dose-response curves for each cell line (maximal levels of cell death) differed between drugs (one-way ANOVA on ranks,P less than 0.01) with EGCG producing lower mean levels of cell death at maximum dose (26%) than fenretinide (62%) or HNK (51% Tukey's HSD,P=0.011,Table 3). There was no correlation between EGCG and HNK with respect to their EC50 or asymptote values across cell lines (Pearson correlation coefficients less than 0.25;P greater than 0.6). Using the induction of GRP78 and ATF4 proteins as markers of ER stress and UPR activation (SamaliNone, 2010), and caspase-3 cleavage as a marker of apoptosis (Figure 3), in dose-response experiments HNK induced caspase-3 cleavage and the expression of ATF4 and GRP78 in all six cell lines; the kinetics of induction with respect to HNK dose and the induction of cell death were similar across cell lines, although ATF4 was induced relatively earlier in WM266-4 melanoma cells (Figure 3). The magnitude of relative induction of the ER stress marker ATF4 in response to HNK was substantially and consistently lower than with bortezomib but comparable or in excess of that obtained with fenretinide except in the WM266-4 and U251 cells (Figure 4). There was also a reduction in GRP78 expression at the highest doses of honkokiol used in most of the cell lines (Figures 3and4). Expression of these ER stress and apoptosis markers in response to EGCG was marginal at best (Figure 4). These data suggest that HNK induces ER stress in neurectodermal tumour cells, possibly as a consequence of an ability to bind GRP78, and indicate that stress responses to EGCG are less well defined. Combination treatment of melanoma and neuroblastoma cells with fenretinide and bortezomib produces synergistic effectsin vitroand in xenograft tumour models (HillNone, 2009;PagnanNone, 2009). As EGCG and HNK also induce ER stress, which may, at least in part, result from an ability to interfere with the ER-stress-sensing function of GRP78, we investigated the ability of these compounds to enhance cell death in combination with fenretinide or bortezomib over 24 h treatment. There was no significant drug-dose effect on ci (linear models,P greater than 0.05 for all cell-line drug combinations). Overall, EGCG was inhibitory in combination with bortezomib regardless of cell line or cell type (Figure 5). In combination with fenretinide, EGCG was inhibitory or additive with respect to glioblastoma and neuroblastoma cells, respectively, but had mildly synergistic effects on melanoma cells. In contrast, HNK had synergistic effects on melanoma and glioblastoma cells in combination with fenretinide or bortezomib, although for neuroblastoma cells HNK had additive effects with fenretinide or inhibitory effects in combination with bortezomib (Figure 5). In addition to cell death, the expression of GRP78 and ATF4, and the induction of caspase-3 cleavage were measured at the same time point. Although HNK or EGCG induced significant increases or decreases of these markers by comparison with fenretinide or bortezomib alone (and in some cases no change), these did not correlate in any consistent way with synergistic, additive or inhibitory effects on cell death (Figure 6). This may be a consequence of a shortened time scale for cell death at increased stress with two drugs acting in concert. Using HNK and the two melanoma lines as models, this possibility was tested by treating cells with HNK and fenretinide or bortezomib, and the induction of cell death after 6, 12 and 24 h, and the induction of GRP78 and ATF4 expression and caspase-3 cleavage after 6 and 12 h compared with cells treated with fenretinide, bortezomib or HNK alone (Figure 7). Cell death was time- and dose-dependent, with the level at 6 h with the combination treatments equivalent to that at 24 h for each drug alone (Figure 7). Honokiol induced markers of ER stress within 6 h. The expression of apoptosis and ER stress markers varied according to marker and drug used. For example, in CHL-1 cells, caspase-3 cleavage was increased by HNK with bortezomib at 6 h and by HNK with fenretinide at 12 h, while GRP78 and ATF4 was increased by HNK with bortezomib at 6 h and then decreased at 12 h compared with bortezomib alone (Figure 7). Clearly, the relationships between single and combination drug treatments and markers of ER stress/UPR signalling are complex and not easily interpretable in relation to the progression of cell death. Recent studies have shown that HNK induces apoptosis of tumour cells (AroraNone, 2011;ChengNone, 2011;JeongNone, 2012;LinNone, 2012). We provide evidence consistent with a mechanism of action for HNK that includes binding to the unfolded ATPase domain of GRP78 with a consequent induction of ER stress. Although EGCG and HNK both bind to the unfolded GRP78 ATPase domain, the data are consistent with HNK having the greater affinity. These results have implications for the mechanism of ER stress resulting from the interaction between either compound with GRP78 and for the potential of these natural products for development as anticancer drugs. The observation that neither HNK nor EGCG bound to folded GRP78 deserves comment in the light of the fact that GRP78 from cell lysates was eluted from the biotinylated-HNK-streptavidin beads and the EGCG-Sepharose 4B affinity experiments reported byErmakovaNone(2006). In the latter case, GRP78 was incubated overnight with EGCG-Sepharose 4B before bound proteins were analysed by immunoblotting (ErmakovaNone, 2006). It is likely that, by analogy with HSP-70 (LiuNone, 2010), an intrinsic mobility of the GRP78 N-terminal domain unfolds it sufficiently to facilitate access of EGCG or HNK under prolonged incubation conditions of a few hours or more. This also raises the question whether the effects of EGCG and HNK on intact cells result from binding to the ATPase domain and, if so, whether this occurs in mature ER-resident GRP78 as a result of conformational dynamics and intrinsic mobility of the ATPase domain, particularly the more-open conformational states that may interact with nucleotide exchange factors (LiuNone, 2010). If such intracellular interactions with the ATPase domain disrupted dynamic equilibria resulting in an increase in free PERK, IRE1 and ATF6, this would explain the induction of ER stress markers such as ATF4 by these agents, particularly HNK that induced UPR activation in melanoma cells within 6 h of treatment. In addition, interaction between GRP78 and EGCG or HNK may occur before post-translational folding of newly synthesised GRP78. GulowNone(2002)have shown that GRP78 is controlled at the translational level and propose that elevated GRP78 levels seen as part of the UPR are produced, at least in part, by increased translational efficiency of pre-existing GRP78 mRNA. These ideas imply negative effects on GRP78 synthesis resulting from the binding of HNK or EGCG to the growing polypeptide when translation of GRP78 mRNA occurs in the presence of these drugs. Possible negative effects would be stalling of translation and a reduced ability for full-length polypeptides to fold correctly into their physiologically active form. These mechanisms would be consistent with synergistic or additive effectsin vitrowhen HNK is combined with antitumour agents. As GRP78 has a key role in sensing ER stress and subsequent homeostatic responses, agents that interfere or modulate this activity may have therapeutic potential. Although EGCG (NamNone, 2001) and HNK (YuNone, 2012) may have other biological properties, studies showing that the AB5subtilase toxin, which cleaves GRP78 specifically, synergistically enhances the activity of ER stress inducers on melanoma cells (MartinNone, 2010) support the idea that chemical inhibitors of GRP78 may be effective as chemotherapeutic drugs. Nevertheless, although EGCG induces cell death and can overcome resistance to chemotherapeutic drugs (ErmakovaNone, 2006;VirreyNone, 2008), on the basis of the present studies it did not have useful properties in combination with agents that induce ER stress. As EGCG, like bortezomib, may also inhibit proteasome activity (NamNone, 2001), the inhibitory effect of EGCG on bortezomib activity could result from competitive interactions at the proteasome active site; how such interference might reduce the subsequent transition to cell death is unknown. In many respects, EGCG was also less effective than HNK, with greater variability between cell lines in sensitivity to EGCG-induced cell death and lower induction of ER stress markers. In contrast to EGCG, HNK had synergistic effects with fenretinide or bortezomib on melanoma and glioblastoma cells. The greater effectiveness of HNK at inducing ER stress was consistent with DSC data indicating greater efficacy of HNK for binding to the unfolded ATPase domain. Recent studies have also shown that HNK can cross the blood-brain barrier (LinNone, 2012), and thus may be a useful adjunct to conventional chemotherapy in the treatment of brain tumours. Clearly, HNK may warrant further development, either as a single drug or as a means to increase efficacy in combination with other antitumour drugs, but this will depend on tumour type. The combination effects of HNK or EGCG could not be related to changes in stress signalling, and the data suggest complex interrelationships between the effects of different drugs and drug combinations and the time-dependent progression of drug-induced cell death. Given the evidence for a direct interaction between HNK or EGCG and the ATPase domain of GRP78, studies are required to identify the interacting domains and how these compounds modify conformational dynamics of GRP78 in the context of the mature ER-resident and newly synthesised forms. These will be important in the use of these compounds, particularly HNK, as it leads for further development of drugs targeting GRP78 to induce ER stress in cancer cells.