During the past decade, homogeneous gold reactions based on Au(i) or Au(iii) catalysis have emerged as an extraordinary tool to create molecular complexity. In these reactions, gold most-commonly acts as a redox-neutral and carbophilic pi-acid that activates carbon-carbon multiple bonds towards nucleophilic attack. 1Alternatively, gold-catalyzed transformations employing a stoichiometric external oxidant, such as Selectfluor, have allowed entry into pathways involving Au(i)/Au(iii);2however, the majority of these reactions still involve intermediates generated from activation of a carbon-carbon pi-bond. The requirement for stoichiometric amounts of strong oxidizing reagents has generally limited the chemistry to pi-bonds and aromatic compounds. 3Recently, stepwise oxidation of gold(i) complexes by photoredox-generated4radical species has emerged as an alternative strategy for accessing Au(i)/Au(iii) coupling reactions. 5Organophosphorus compounds have drawn increasing attention due to their broad applications in biological, pharmaceutical, and material sciences. 6These compounds are commonly accessed through transition metal-catalyzed coupling processes. 7More recently, the desired coupling has been achieved through the reaction of phosphonate esters8or phosphine oxides9with highly electrophilic arylcopper(iii) intermediates10generated from oxidation of copper(i) with diaryliodionium(iii) salts [eqn (1)]. While the reported combined photoredox/gold-catalyzed reactions have relied on the intervention of carbon-carbon pi-bonds [eqn (2)], we hypothesized that the gold(iii) intermediates generated in this manner might also engage in coupling reactions with other nucleophilic species [eqn (3)]. 11NoneTo this end, we explored the dual photoredox/gold-catalyzed coupling reaction ofp-tolyldiazonium12with diethyl phosphite (Table 1). The initial screening of solvents found that the desired product was formed in 37% yield when acetonitrile was employed as solvent (Table 1, entry 1). Other solvents commonly employed in photocatalysis, such as DMF and EtOH, were also tested and afforded the product in 50% and 65%, respectively (Table 1, entries 2 and 3). In order to exploit the better solubility of diazonium salts and tautomerization ofH-phosphonates13in polar solvents, we explored whether a solvent mixture with ethanol might improve the reaction outcome. The co-solvent consisting of MeCN/EtOH (4 : 1) gave the best result, affording the arylphosphonate in 82% yield (Table 1, entries 4-7). Lower yields were obtained when Ru(bpy)3Cl2or Ir(ppy)3were used as the photocatalyst (Table 1, entries 8 and 9). No product was observed with IPrAuCl as the gold catalyst (Table 1, entry 10), and reducing the amount of photocatalyst or gold catalyst both gave lower yields (Table 1, entries 11 and 12). Moreover, no product was detected when the reaction was performed in the absence of the gold catalyst (Table 1, entry 13) and significantly reduced yields of3awere observed in the absence of the Ru(bpy)3(PF6)2and/or light (Table 1, entries 14 and 15). We also examined replacing the gold catalyst with those derived from palladium, silver or copper salts; however, only moderate yield was obtained when Pd(OAc)2was used (Table 1, entry 16), and no product was detected with other catalysts even when the reaction time was prolonged to 16 h (Table 1, entries 17-22). NoneReactions were carried out at room temperature with a 26 W household bulb,1a(0.3 mmol),2a(0.1 mmol), cat. (10 mol%), photocatalyst (2 mol%), degassed solvent (0.5 ml), N2atmosphere, rt. NoneIsolated yields. None1 mol% Ru(bpy)3(PF6)2was used. None5 mol% Ph3PAuCl was used. NoneReaction run in the dark. None10 mol% PPh3was used as the ligand. With the optimized conditions in hand, we investigated the scope of the diazonium substrates. Aryldiazoniums salts bearing electron-donating groups at theirpara-positions, such as methyl, phenyl and methoxy, were coupled with diethyl phosphite affording the corresponding products in good to excellent yields (Table 2, compounds3a-3c). However, the reactivity was dramatically decreased when aryldiazoniums salts containing strong withdrawing groups such as -CF3and -NO2were used (Table 2, compounds3kand3l). As expected, theP-arylation using aryl diazoniums with halogen in theirparaandmetapositions proceeded efficiently, and yields of 71-86% were obtained (Table 2, compounds3e-3g). However, 2-bromophenyl diazonium was less reactive comparatively and 37% yield of the product was obtained (Table 2, compound3h). The naphthyl phosphonate was isolated in 72% yield under the standard reaction conditions (Table 2, compound3i). NoneReaction conditions: 1 (0.3 mmol),2a(0.1 mmol), Ph3PAuCl (10 mol%), Ru(bpy)3(PF6)2(2 mol%), degassed MeCN : EtOH = (4 : 1) (0.5 ml), N2atmosphere, visible light, rt. for4h, isolated yields for all products. None1 (9 mmol),2a(3 mmol), Ph3PAuCl (8 mol%), Ru(bpy)3(PF6)2(2 mol%); isolated yields. We next turned our attention to an evaluation of the scope and limitations of our reaction with different types of P(O)H compounds. As seen inTable 3, aryl diazonium salts with electron-donating, electron-withdrawing and halogen substituents reacted withH-phosphonate diesters bearing different alkyl groups efficiently, and yields of 74-90% were obtained (Table 3, entries 1-5). The reaction also proceeded smoothly with dibenzyl and ethyl phenylphosphinate as coupling partners (Table 3, entries 6 and 8). The more challenging coupling ofH-phosphonate diphenylester also occurred under the gold-catalyzed reaction conditions, albeit it in diminished yield (Table 3, entry 7). NoneReaction conditions: 1 (0.3 mmol), 2 (0.1 mmol), Ph3PAuCl (10 mol%), Ru(bpy)3(PF6)2(2 mol%), degassed MeCN : EtOH = (4 : 1) (0.5 ml), N2atmosphere, visible light, rt. for4h. NoneIsolated yield. NoneMeCN : MeOH = (4 : 1) (0.5 ml) as the solvent. NoneMeCN : iPrOH = (4 : 1) (0.5 ml) as the solvent. Interestingly, phenyl phosphinic acid was also a competent nucleophile for this reaction yielding products of a three-component coupling between the diazonium salt, arylphosphinic acid and the alkyl alcohol solvent [eqn (4)]. Additionally, the intermediate aryl diazonium salt can be generated without purification from the corresponding aniline. For example,3ewas obtained in 69% through one-pot, two-step procedure for the diazotization andP-arylation of 4-fluoroaniline, compared with 86% under standard conditions [eqn (5)]. In conclusion, we have developed the first gold-catalyzed oxidativeP-arylation ofH-phosphonates promoted by visible light photoredox catalysis. The reaction proceeds under mild reaction conditions (room temperature, no base) and shows excellent substrate scope, including the use of phosphinic acids as coupling partners. More broadly, the use of photoredox catalysis to achieve the oxidation event required for cross-coupling,5,14avoids the need for strong oxidants associated with known gold-catalyzed coupling reactions. 15This feature putatively allows for increased functional group compatibility, as clearly demonstrated by the gold-catalyzed formation of alkyne-substituted phosphinate ester3v, in which the potentially reactive carbon-carbon pi-bond16is left intact, and can subsequently be engaged in a copper-catalyzed alkyne-azide click reaction17[eqn (6)]. The development of this strategy for cross-coupling and detailed mechanistic studies is ongoing in our group. NoneClick here for additional data file.