Dicoordinated d10-transition-metal complexes ML2occur in numerous catalytic reaction mechanisms. 1These complexes, in general, have a linear geometry2-5with a ligand-metal-ligand (L-M-L') angle (or bite angle) of 180 degrees , although exceptions6,7have been observed. This geometrical preference can be easily understood for a closed-shell d10configuration. In most cases, the dominant bonding orbital interaction is sigma donation from the ligand's lone-pair orbitals into the empty metal (n+1)s atomic orbital (AO), which has a ligand-metal bond overlap that is independent of the L-M-L' angle (see Figure1). 8At the same time, the steric repulsion associated with a L?? ?L' overlap between the lone pairs (and other closed shells) of the two ligands yields a force that maximizes their mutual distance and thus yields the well-known linear L-M-L' arrangement. sigma Donation has no preference (left, middle) whereas sterics favor linear L-M-L (right). The same conclusion is obtained if one uses valence shell electron pair repulsion (VSEPR) theory adapted for treating transition-metal complexes,9,10or more sophisticated methods based on molecular orbital (MO) theory. Proceeding from the latter, one can deduce the preference for linear over bent ML2complexes from the number of electrons in the valence orbitals and the dependence of the orbital energies on the geometrical parameter of interest (here, the L-M-L angle) in Walsh diagrams. 8These diagrams show again that dicoordinate d10-transition-metal complexes, for example, Ag(NH3)2+, adopt a linear geometry due to the significant destabilization of the metal dxzAO by the ligand's lone-pair orbitals in combination with steric repulsion between the latter upon bending (see below). Nearly all instances with substantial deviations of the L-M-L bite angle from linearity are complexes in which this distortion is imposed by the structural constraints in bidentate ligands in which a bridge or scaffold forces the two coordinating centers L towards each other. 1b-dIn this work, we show that d10-ML2complexes are not necessarily linear and may even have a pronounced intrinsic preference to adopt a nonlinear equilibrium geometry. To this end, we have investigated the molecular geometries and electronic structure of a series of d10-ML2complexes (M=Co-, Rh-, Ir-, Ni, Pd, Pt, Cu+, Ag+, Au+; L=NH3, PH3, CO) using relativistic density functional theory (DFT). Simple d10-ML2complexes are found with substantial deviations from linearity, featuring bite angles as small as 131 degrees or even less. All that is necessary for bent d10-ML2complexes to occur is sufficiently strong pi backdonation. This emerges from our detailed metal-ligand bonding analyses in the conceptual framework of quantitative MO theory contained in Kohn-Sham DFT. The analyses explain the phenomenon and provide a tool for rationally tuning the bite angle. Based on our analyses, we can augment the text-book Walsh diagram for bending ML2complexes involving only sigma donation with an extended Walsh diagram that also includes pi backbonding. Computational details: All calculations were carried out using the Amsterdam Density Functional (ADF) program developed by Baerends and co-workers11-13The numerical integration was performed using the procedure developed by te Velde et al. 14The molecular orbitals (MOs) were expanded in a large uncontracted set of Slater-type orbitals (STOs): TZ2P (no Gaussian functions are involved). The TZ2P basis set15is of triple-zetaquality for all atoms and has been augmented with two sets of polarization functions, that is, 2p and 3d on H, 3d and 4f on C, N, O and P, 4p and 4f on Co, Ni, Cu, 5p and 4f on Rh, Pd and Ag and 6p and 5f on Ir, Pt and Au. An auxiliary set of s, p, d, f and g STOs was used to fit the molecular density and to represent the Coulomb and exchange potentials accurately in each self-consistent field (SCF) cycle. All electrons are included in the variational treatment (no frozen-core approximation used). Equilibrium structures were obtained by optimizations using analytical gradient techniques. 16Geometries and energies were calculated at the BLYP level of the generalized gradient approximation (GGA): exchange is described by Slater's Xalpha potential,17with nonlocal corrections due to Becke18added self-consistently, and correlation is treated using the gradient-corrected functional of Lee, Yang and Parr. 19Scalar relativistic effects were accounted for using the zeroth-order regular approximation (ZORA). 20This approach has been extensively tested and was shown to agree well with high-level coupled-cluster reference data. 21Energy minima have been verified through vibrational analysis. 22All minima were found to have zero imaginary frequencies. The PyFrag program was used to facilitate the analyses of the bonding mechanism as a function of the L-M-L angle. 23Bond energy analysis: The bond energy DeltaEis decomposed into the strain energy DeltaEstrain, that is associated with the geometrical deformation of the fragments as the bond formation takes place, plus the actual interaction energy DeltaEintbetween the deformed fragments [Equation (1)]. NoneNoneThe interaction energy DeltaEint(zeta) between two molecular fragments is analyzed as a function of the bite anglezetain the conceptual framework provided by the Kohn-Sham MO method. 24To this end, it is decomposed in three physically meaningful terms [Eq. (2)] using a quantitative energy decomposition scheme developed by Ziegler and Rauk. 25NoneNoneThe term DeltaVelstatcorresponds to the classical electrostatic interaction between the unperturbed charge distributionsrhoA(r)+rhoB(r) of the prepared or deformed fragments A and B (see below for definition of the fragments) that adopt their positions in the overall molecule AB, and is usually attractive. The Pauli repulsion term DeltaEPaulicomprises the destabilizing interactions between occupied orbitals and is responsible for the steric repulsion. This repulsion is caused by the fact that two electrons with the same spin cannot occupy the same region in space. It arises as the energy change associated with the transition from the superposition of the unperturbed electron densitiesrhoA(r)+rhoB(r) of the geometrically deformed but isolated fragments A and B, to the wavefunction Psi0=N A[PsiAPsiB], that properly obeys the Pauli principle through explicit antisymmetrization (Aoperator) and renormalization (Nconstant) of the product of fragment wavefunctions (see Ref. 24for an exhaustive discussion). The orbital interaction DeltaEoiaccounts for charge transfer (interaction between occupied orbitals on one fragment with unoccupied orbitals on the other fragment, including the HOMO-LUMO interactions) and polarization (empty-occupied orbital mixing on one fragment due to the presence of another fragment). It can be further divided into contributions from each irreducible representationGammaof the interacting system [Eq. (3)]. NoneNoneStructural and energetic data emerging from our ZORA-BLYP/TZ2P computations are collected in Tables1-4. Most ML2complexes have a linear L-M-L angle, which leads to eitherD3None-symmetric complexes M(NH3)2and M(PH3)2orD?h-symmetric complexes M(CO)2. However, numerous significantly smaller angles appear throughout Table1as well, where the symmetry of the complexes is lowered toC2None. For instance, the complexes become increasingly bent when the ligands are varied along NH3(a strong sigma donor), PH3(a sigma donor and pi acceptor) and CO (a strong pi acceptor). This is most clearly seen for the group 9 complexes, where, for example, the angle decreases along Rh(NH3)2-, Rh(PH3)2-and Rh(CO)2-from 180.0 degrees to 141.2 degrees and 130.8 degrees (Figure2). In a later section, we will show that the pi-backbonding properties of the complexes constitute a prominent part of the explanation of why d10-ML2complexes can adopt nonlinear geometries. The increasingly strong pi backbonding along this series also results in stronger metal-ligand bonds (see Table2for bond dissociation energies (BDEs) and Table3for energy decomposition analyses (EDA) results for ML complexes). L-M-L angle [ degrees ] and linearization energy DeltaElin[kcal mol-1] in dicoordinate d10-ML2complexes[a][a] Computed at ZORA-BLYP/TZ2P. [b] Relative energy of the linear ML2complex relative to its equilibrium geometry. M-L bond length [A] and BDE [kcal mol-1] in monocoordinate d10-ML and dicoordinate d10-ML2complexes[a][a] Computed at ZORA-BLYP/TZ2P. Bond dissociation energies (BDEs) are given for the complexes in the electronic configuration corresponding to a d10s0electron configuration and relative to closed-shell d10s0metal atoms. [b] The d10s0-type configuration is an excited state of the complex. [c] The d10s0configuration is an excited state of the atomic metal fragment. Energy decomposition analyses [kcal mol-1] and orbital energiesepsilon[eV] for the metal-ligand bonds in monoligated transition-metal complexes M-L[a][a] Computed at ZORA-BLYP/TZ2P. See [Eqs. (1)-(3)]. [b] Also includes small contributions from delta orbital interactions, which can only be separated forC?v-symmetric MCO complexes. There, the delta term amounts at most to 3.5 % of the pi term. Ligand orbital energiesepsilon[eV] and proton affinities [kcal mol-1][a][a] Computed at ZORA-BLYP/TZ2P. LP: lone pair, pi*: acceptor orbital. Proton affinities (PA) from enthalpies at 298.15 K and 1 atm. Equilibrium geometries computed at ZORA-BLYP/TZ2P. From left to right: Rh(NH3)2-, Rh(PH3)2-and Rh(CO)2-. The extent of bending systematically decreases when the pi-backbonding capability of the metal center decreases from the group 9 anions, via neutral group 10 atoms, to the group 11 cations. This is clearly displayed by the series of isoelectronic complexes Rh(CO)2-, Pd(CO)2and Ag(CO)2+along which the L-M-L angle increases from 130.8 degrees to 155.6 degrees to 180 degrees (Table1). The data in Table3for the corresponding monocoordinate RhCO-, PdCO and AgCO+nicely show how along this series the distortive pi-orbital interactions DeltaNoneindeed become weaker, from -120 to -51 to -11 kcal mol-1, respectively. In the case of group 9 metals, both phosphine and carbonyl complexes are bent, whereas, for group 10 metals, only the carbonyl complexes deviate from linearity. Complexes with a metal center from group 11 all have a linear L-M-L configuration. The reduced pi backbonding also leads to weaker metal-ligand bonds. For the cationic metal centers, for which pi backdonation plays a much smaller role, the metal-ligand BDEs decrease in the order NH3 greater than PH3 greater than CO (see Table2). This trend originates directly from the sigma-donating capabilities of the ligands as reflected by the energy of the lone-pair orbitalepsilon(LP), which decreases in this order (see Table4). Note that, for the same reason, the basicity of the ligand as measured by the proton affinity (PA) decreases along NH3 greater than PH3 greater than CO.26For the anionic group 9 metal centers, the opposite order is found, that is, metal-ligand BDEs decrease in the order CO greater than PH3 greater than NH3, following the pi-accepting capabilities of the ligands. Linearity also increases if one descends in a group. For example, from Ni(CO)2to Pd(CO)2to Pt(CO)2, the L-M-L angle increases from 144.5 degrees to 155.6 degrees to 159.0 degrees . Interestingly, this last trend is opposite to what one would expect proceeding from a steric model. If one goes from a larger to a smaller metal center, that is, going up in a group, the ligands are closer to each other and thus experience stronger mutual steric repulsion. But instead of becoming more linear to avoid such repulsion, the complexes bend even further in the case of the smaller metal. For example, when the palladium atom in Pd(CO)2is replaced by a smaller nickel atom, the L-M-L angle decreases from 155.6 degrees in Pd(CO)2to 144.5 degrees in Ni(CO)2. Later on, we show that this seemingly counterintuitive trend also originates from enhanced pi backbonding which dominates the increased steric repulsion. The bending of our model complexes can be understood in terms of a monocoordinate complex to which a second ligand is added either in a linear or a bent arrangement, ML+L- greater than ML2(see below). Using Pd(CO)2as an example, we start from a PdCO fragment, and consider the addition of the second CO ligand both at a 180 degrees angle and a 90 degrees angle. Our Kohn-Sham MO analyses show that, in PdCO, the degeneracy of the five occupied d orbitals on palladium is lowered by interactions with the ligand (see Figure3). Choosing the M-L bond along thezaxis, the dxzand dyzorbitals act as donor orbitals for pi backdonation into the two pi*-acceptor orbitals on the CO ligand, resulting in two stabilized "dpi" orbitals at -6.5 eV (value not shown in Figure3). The dxyand dNone(or "ddelta") orbitals at -5.5 eV do not overlap and interact with the ligand. The dNoneorbital is destabilized due to the antibonding overlap with the lone pair on the ligand, resulting in a "dsigma" orbital that is relatively high in energy, at -5.3 eV. A)Schematic MO diagrams for the bonding mechanism between PdCO and CO in linear Pd(CO)2(left) and at a L-M-L angle of 90 degrees (right): dominant interactions (-), other interactions (- - - -), pi backbonding (-). B) Schematic representation of the bonding overlaps of the donating orbital on PdCO (black) with the pi-accepting orbital on the second CO ligand (red). When the second CO ligand coordinates opposite the first one (i.e., in a linear L-M-L arrangement), its pi*-acceptor orbitals interact with the dpiorbitals on the PdCO fragment. The latter are already considerably stabilized by pi backdonation to the first CO ligand (Figure3 B, left). When, instead, the second ligand is added at an angle of 90 degrees , its pi* orbitals overlap with only one dpiorbital, and with one ddeltaorbital (Figure3 B, right). This ddeltaorbital is essentially a pure metal d orbital that hasnotyet been stabilized by any coordination bond. Consequently, this orbital has a higher energy and is, therefore, a more capable donor orbital for pi backdonation into the pi* orbital of the second CO ligand. This results in a stronger, more stabilizing donor-acceptor interaction of this pair of orbitals in the 90 degrees (Figure3 A, right) than in the 180 degrees ML2geometry (Figure3 A, left: cf. red-highlighted pi interactions). sigma-Donation interactions are affected less by bending. It is therefore pi backdonation that favors bending. The more detailed energy decomposition analyses in the following sections consolidate this picture. To understand the trends in nonlinearity of our ML2complexes (see above and Table1), we have quantitatively analyzed the metal-ligand bonding between ML and the second ligand L as a function of the L-M-L angle. The results are collected in Table2and displayed in Figure4-7. Most of our model complexes have a d10-type ground-state configuration but not all of them, as indicated in detail inTable 2. Yet,allmodel systems discussed here have been kept in d10-configuration, to achieve a consistent comparison and because, on the longer term, we are interested in understanding more realistic dicoordinated d10-transition-metal complexes that feature, for example, as catalytically active species in metal-mediated bond activation. We start in all cases from the optimallinearML2structure (i.e., the complex optimized in eitherD?horD3Nonesymmetry) and then analyze the bonding between ML and L' as a function of the L-M-L angle, from 180 degrees to 90 degrees , while keeping all other geometry parameters frozen. The analyses were done inCssymmetry, bending the complexes in the mirror plane, with the out-of-plane hydrogen atoms of M(NH3)2and M(PH3)2towards each other. Thus, we are able to separate the orbital interactions symmetric to the mirror plane (A' irrep) from the orbital interactions asymmetric to the mirror plane (A" irrep): DeltaEoi(zeta)=None[Eq. (3)]. The use of frozen fragment geometries allows us to study purely how the interaction energy changes as the angle is varied, without any perturbation due to geometrical relaxation. Therefore, any change in DeltaEstems exclusively from a change in DeltaEint=DeltaVelstat+DeltaEPauli+DeltaNone+DeltaNone. Note that rigid bending of the linearly optimized L-M-L complexes causes minima on the energy profiles to shift to larger angles than in fully optimized complexes, but this does not alter any relative structural or energy order. In Figure4, we show the energy decomposition analyses [Eq. (2)] and how they vary along the palladium complexes Pd(NH3)2, Pd(PH3)2and Pd(CO)2. Upon bending the LM-L' complex from 180 degrees to 90 degrees , the average distance between the electron density on LM and the nuclei of L' decreases (the Pd-P distance however remains constant), which results in a more stabilizing electrostatic attraction DeltaVelstat. Likewise, the Pauli repulsion DeltaEPauliincreases because of a larger overlap of the lone pair on L' with the dNone-derived dsigmaorbital on the ML fragment. The latter is the antibonding combination of the metal dNoneorbital and the ligand lone pair, with a fair amount of metal s character admixed in an L-M bonding fashion. The resulting hybrid orbital is essentially the dNoneorbital with a relatively large torus. The increase in Pauli repulsion that occurs as the L-M-L' angle decreases stems largely from the overlap of the lone pair on the second ligand L' with this torus. For Pd(CO)2for example, the overlap of the L' lone pair with the dsigmahybrid orbital on ML increases from 0.05 to 0.28 upon bending from 180 degrees to 90 degrees . We note that this repulsion induces a secondary relaxation, showing up as a stabilizing DeltaNone, by which it is largely canceled again. The mechanism through which this relief of Pauli repulsion happens is that, in the antibonding combination with the L' lone pair, the dsigmaorbital is effectively pushed up in energy and (through its L'-lone-pair component) interacts in a stabilizing fashion with the metal s-derived LUMO on ML. Energy decomposition analysis [Eq. (2)] of the interaction between PdL and L in dicoordinated palladium complexes PdL2as a function of the L-M-L angle (L=NH3, PH3, CO). The aforementioned pi backbonding that favors bending (see Figure3) shows up in an increased stabilization in the asymmetric DeltaNonecomponent as the L-M-L angle decreases. To more clearly reveal the role of the orbital interactions within A'' symmetry, we separate the interaction energy DeltaEintinto the corresponding termNoneplus the remaining interaction energy DeltaE'int, which combines the other interaction terms comprising electrostatic attraction DeltaVelstat, Pauli repulsion DeltaEPauli, and the symmetric orbital interactions DeltaNone:NoneNoneThus, the interaction energy is split into two contributions which are both stabilizing along a large part of the energy profiles studied and which vary over a significantly smaller range. Therefore, this decomposition allows us to directly compare the importance of DeltaNonewith respect to the combined influence of all other terms, contained in DeltaE'int. The latter contains the aforementioned counteracting and largely canceling terms of strong Pauli repulsion between A' orbitals and the resulting stabilizing relaxation effect DeltaNone. The results of this alternative decomposition appear in Figure5, again for the series of palladium complexes Pd(NH3)2, Pd(PH3)2and Pd(CO)2. In each of these complexes, bending begins at a certain point to weaken the DeltaE'intenergy term and, at smaller L-M-L angles, makes it eventually repulsive as the Pauli repulsion term becomes dominant (see also Figure4). Numerical experiments, in which we consider the rigid bending process of a complex in which the metal is removed, show that steric repulsion between ligands does contribute to this repulsion, especially at smaller angles. Thus, direct Pauli repulsion between L and L' in LM-L' goes, upon bending from 180 degrees to 90 degrees , from 0.3 to 4.6 kcal mol-1for Pd(NH3)2and from 0.4 to 9.0 kcal mol-1for Pd(CO)2(data not shown in Figures). This finding confirms that ligands avoid each other for steric reasons, but it also shows that the effect is small as compared to the overall change in the DeltaEintcurves (see Figure5). The dominant term that causes DeltaEintto go up in energy upon bending is the increasing Pauli repulsion that occurs as the L' lone pair overlaps more effectively with the LM dsigmaorbital. Energy decomposition analysis [Eq. (4)] of the interaction between PdL and L in dicoordinated palladium complexes PdL2as a function of the L-M-L angle (L=NH3, PH3, CO). In a number of cases, the stabilization upon bending from the asymmetric orbital interactions DeltaNonedominates the destabilization from the DeltaE'intterm. These cases are the complexes that adopt nonlinear equilibrium geometries. ThisNoneterm gains stabilization upon bending LM-L' because the pi*-acceptor orbital on the ligand L' moves from a position in which it can overlap with a ligand-stabilized LM dpiorbital to a more or less pure metal and, thus, up to 1 eV higher-energy ddeltaorbital (see Table3), which leads to a more stabilizing donor-acceptor orbital interaction (see Figure5). The gain in stabilization of DeltaNoneupon bending and, thus, the tendency to bend increases along NH3to PH3to CO. The reason is the increasing pi-accepting ability of the ligands as reflected by the energyepsilon(pi*) of the ligands' pi* orbital which is lowered from +1.42 to -0.24 to -1.92 eV, respectively (see Table4). Thus, for Pd(NH3)2, where pi backdonation plays essentially no role, theNoneterm is stabilized by less than 0.5 kcal mol-1if we go from 180 degrees to 90 degrees . For PH3, known as a moderate pi-accepting ligand, this energy term is stabilized by 1.5 kcal mol-1from 180 degrees to 90 degrees and, for CO, this stabilization amounts to 2.5 kcal mol-1. Thus, in the case of palladium complexes, the energy profile for bending the complexes becomes progressively more flat as the ligands are better pi acceptors, but only the carbonyl ligand generates sufficient stabilization through increased pi-backbonding in DeltaNoneto shift the equilibrium geometry to an angle smaller than 180 degrees . Applying the same analysis along the series Rh(CO)2-, Pd(CO)2and Ag(CO)2+, reveals a similar but clearer picture (Figure6). Along this series of isoelectronic complexes, the equilibrium geometries have L-M-L angles of 130.8 degrees , 155.6 degrees and 180.0 degrees . Similar to the results obtained for the series discussed above, we again find a DeltaE'intterm that is relatively shallow and eventually, at small angles, dominated by the Pauli repulsion. The DeltaE'intterm does not provide additional stabilization upon bending the complex. We do observe, however, a DeltaNonecomponent that, from Rh(CO)2-to Pd(CO)2to Ag(CO)2+, becomes more stabilizing and also gains more stabilization upon bending from 180 degrees to 90 degrees . That is, whereas for Ag(CO)2+theNoneremains constant at a value of -5.4 kcal mol-1as the complex is bent from 180 degrees to 90 degrees ; the same component for Pd(CO)2starts already at a more stabilizing value of -15.1 kcal mol-1at 180 degrees and is stabilized more than 2.5 kcal mol-1as the complex is bent to 90 degrees . For Rh(CO)2-, the effect of the additional stabilization upon bending is strongest, almost 10 kcal mol-1, as DeltaNonegoes from -28.4 kcal mol-1at 180 degrees to -37.3 kcal mol-1at 90 degrees . The mechanism behind this trend is that the donor capability of the metal d orbitals increases as they are pushed up in energy from the cationic AgCO+to the neutral PdCO to the negative RhCO-(see Table3). This trend of increasing d orbital energies leads to a concomitant strengthening pi backdonation and, thus, an increasing energydifferencein the LM fragment between the pure metal ddeltaand the ligand-stabilized dpiorbitals. Thus, the "fresh" ddeltaorbitals are higher in energy than the ligand-stabilized dpiorbitals by 0.21 to 0.96 to 1.65 eV along AgCO+, PdCO and RhCO-, respectively (see Table3). Consequently, the LM-L' complexes benefit progressively along this series from increasing the overlap of L' pi* with the higher-energy ddeltaorbitals in the bent geometry. Energy decomposition analysis [Eq. (4)] of the interaction between MCO and CO in dicarbonyl-transition-metal complexes M(CO)2as a function of the L-M-L angle (M=Rh-, Pd, Ag+). Variation of the metal down a group goes with a less pronounced increase of the L-M-L angle that originates from more subtle changes in the bonding mechanism. The largest variation in bite angle is observed along the group 10 complexes Ni(CO)2, Pd(CO)2and Pt(CO)2which show L-M-L angles of 144.5 degrees , 155.6 degrees and 159.0 degrees , respectively (see Table1). Two factors lie behind this trend: (1) a weakening in pi backbonding as the metal orbital energy decreases from nickel 3d to palladium 4d; (2) a steeper increase upon bending in Pauli repulsion between PtCO dsigma(that has a large torus due to strong admixture of the relativistically stabilized Pt 6s AO) and the lone pair of the other CO ligand. As shown in Figure7, the pi-backbonding stabilization of DeltaNoneupon bending is indeed stronger for Ni(CO)2than for Pd(CO)2and Pt(CO)2. The difference between the latter is small because the greater (more favorable) overlap of the pi* orbitals on the ligand with the more extended platinum d orbitals on PtCO compensates for the lower (less favorable) platinum d orbital energy. Figure7also shows how the DeltaE'intterm containing the aforementioned Pauli repulsion becomes more rapidly destabilizing at smaller angles for Pt(CO)2than for Ni(CO)2and Pd(CO)2. Likewise, in the case of group 9 complexes, the more steeply increasing Pauli repulsion of the ligand lone pair with the large iridium dsigmatorus pushes the equilibrium L-M-L angle of Ir(CO)2-(134.2 degrees ) to a larger value than for Rh(CO)2-(130.8 degrees ; see Table1). Interestingly, here, the linearization energy DeltaElinis nevertheless higher for the less bent Ir(CO)2-(13.4 kcal mol-1) than for Rh(CO)2-(10.2 kcal mol-1) because of the more favorable pi-backbonding overlap between IrCO-and CO (see Table1). This illustrates the subtlety of the interplay between the two features in the bonding mechanism. Energy decomposition analysis [Eq. (4)] of the interaction between MCO and CO in dicarbonyl-transition-metal complexes M(CO)2as a function of the L-M-L angle (M=Ni, Pd, Pt). Based on detailed Kohn-Sham MO analyses of individual complexes, we have constructed generalized Walsh diagrams corresponding to bending the ML2complexes from 180 degrees to 90 degrees . This choice comes down to an alternative perspective on the same problem, and the emerging electronic mechanism, why bending may occur, is fully equivalent to the one obtained in the above analyses based on two interacting fragments LM+L', namely: Bending ML2to a nonlinear geometry enables ligand pi* orbitals (if they are available on L) to overlap with and stabilize metal d orbitals that are not stabilized in the linear arrangement. The spectrum of different bonding situations has been summarized in two simplified diagrams that correspond to two extreme situations: weakly pi-accepting ligands (Figure8 A) and strongly pi-accepting ligands (Figure8 B). In these diagrams, we position the dNoneorbital in linear ML2above the other d orbitals, a situation that occurs, for example, for Pd(PH3)2. The relative position of the dNonemay change, and in some complexes, such as, Rh(NH3)2-, it is located below the other d orbitals. These variations do not affect the essential property of the orbitals, namely, their change in energy upon bending the ML2complex. Furthermore, we speak about weakly pi-accepting ligands, not just about (purely) sigma-donating ligands, because it turns out that none of our model ligands has negligible pi-accepting capability. The resulting Walsh diagrams summarize our results in a more easy to use pictorial manner which, in particular for the situation with strongly pi-accepting ligands, is novel. Simplified Walsh diagrams for bending ML2complexes that emerge from our Kohn-Sham MO analyses (+/- indicate bonding/antibonding) A) without and B) with pi backbonding. We first examine the diagram with weakly pi-accepting ligands (Figure8 A). Bending ML2from linear to nonlinear significantly destabilizes the dxzorbital because of turning on overlap with the out-of-phase combination of ligand lone pairs. This effect is related to the overlap between the LM dsigmatorus and the L' lone pair in the fragment approach (see above). At small angles, direct ligand-ligand antibonding becomes important. The dNoneorbital is slightly stabilized in the nonlinear situation due to a decreasing antibonding overlap with the in-phase combination of ligand lone pairs, augmented by admixing with the dNoneorbital (see a detailed scheme of this intermixing inFigure S1of the Supporting Information). Note that if our model ligands would have been purely sigma donating, the dxz, dyzand dxylevels would not be affected by L-M-L bending. Yet, they are, although only slightly so. This is a manifestation of some pi backbonding, which is discussed in more detail below for the strongly pi-accepting ligands. In the case of strongly pi-accepting orbitals (Figure8 B), bending ML2from linear to nonlinear still goes with significant destabilization of dxzand slight stabilization of dNone(for the same reasons as discussed above for weakly pi-accepting ligands). pi Backbonding stabilizes both dxzand dyzin the linear L-M-L arrangement; bending reduces pi overlap which causes also dyzto increase in energy. A striking phenomenon in the ML2Walsh diagram with strongly pi-accepting ligands is the significant stabilization of the dNoneand dxyorbitals that occurs as bending moves ligand pi* orbitals in the right orientation for pi-accepting overlap with these orbitals. The resulting stabilization, if strong enough, can overcome the destabilization of the dxzorbital and accounts for the observed bent complexes described in this work. This effect is related to the overlap between the LM ddeltaorbital and the L' pi* in the fragment approach (see above). The same effect also nicely accounts for the nonlinear structures observed in earlier studies for d0metal complexes with pi-donatingligands. 27-31For these complexes, a pi-bonding mechanism has been proposed in which bending is favorable because it effectively increases the number of d orbitals that have non-zero overlap with the pi-donating orbitals on the ligands. 28Dicoordinated d10-transition-metal complexes ML2can very well adopt nonlinear geometries with bite angles that deviate significantly from the usually expected 180 degrees . This follows from our relativistic density functional theory (DFT) computations on a broad range of archetypal d10-ML2model systems. The smallest bite angle encountered in our exploration among 27 model systems amounts to 128.6 degrees for Co(CO)2-. Nonlinear geometries appear to be a direct consequence of pi backbonding. The geometry of d10-ML2complexes results from two opposing features in the bonding mechanism, which we have analyzed in terms of the interaction between ML and L as a function of the L-M-L angle using quantitative molecular orbital (MO) theory and energy decomposition analyses: Bending destabilizes the interaction DeltaEintbetween ML and L through increasing steric (Pauli) repulsion between the ligands' lone-pair orbital lobes as well as a destabilization, by the latter, of the ML dsigmahybrid orbital; however, bendingcan also stabilizeDeltaEintbecause of enhanced pi backdonation. The reason is that the pi-accepor orbital on the ligand L (e.g., CO pi*) interacts in the linear arrangement with an already stabilized ML dpihybrid orbital, whereas in the bent geometry, it enters into a more favorable donor-acceptor orbital interaction with an unstabilized, that is, higher-energy metal ddeltaorbital. Our analyses complement the existing text-book Walsh diagram for bending ML2complexes8with a variant that includes metal-ligand pi backbonding. Our findings also contribute to a more rational design of catalytically active and selective ML2complexes. 1,32