Antibodies (Abs) with high affinity for antigen are produced by the process of affinity maturation (AM), which takes place in germinal centers (GCs). GCs are dynamic structures within secondary lymphoid tissues that arise in response to antigen stimulation (Shlomchik and Weisel, 2012;Victora and Nussenzweig, 2012). GCs house B cells, antigen-specific T helper cells that develop in concert with GC B cells (Baumjohann et al., 2013;Kelsoe, 1996), and antigens presented on follicular dendritic cells (FDCs) (Figure 1A). GC B cells enhance the antigen affinity of their receptors by 10-1000 fold through cycles of mutation and selection against antigens presented on FDCs, a Darwinian evolutionary process that occurs on a very short time scale. Soluble forms of the high affinity receptors are potent Abs. AM has been studied extensively using diverse experimental methods (Batista and Neuberger, 1998;Berek and Milstein, 1987;Berek et al., 1991;Eisen and Siskind, 1964;Jacob et al., 1991;Kocks and Rajewsky, 1988), mathematical models (Deem and Lee, 2003;Kepler and Perelson, 1993;Meyer-Hermann, 2002,Meyer-Hermann et al., 2006;Oprea and Perelson, 1997;Zhang and Shakhnovich, 2010), and computer simulations (Kesmir and de Boer, 2003;Shlomchik et al., 1998;Swerdlin et al., 2008). Recent experiments have uncovered new aspects of GC dynamics (Allen et al., 2007;Shulman et al., 2013;Victora et al., 2010). Effective Ab responses are likely to be required for a protective prophylactic vaccine against highly mutable pathogens. For HIV, a quintessential example of such a pathogen, despite extensive efforts, there has been no definitive success in designing such a vaccine (Burton et al., 2012;Klein et al., 2013;Kwong et al., 2013;Mascola and Haynes, 2013). This is in large part due to the variability of HIV (Burton et al., 2012;Mascola and Haynes, 2013). The protective effects of an Ab are predicated on its ability to bind to a set of residues (the epitope) on the surface of virions. For example, the HIV-1 envelope glycoprotein trimer (Env) is the sole target of known HIV-1 neutralizing Abs (Burton et al., 2012;Kwong et al., 2013;Mascola and Haynes, 2013;West et al., 2014). During the first few months of infection, the induced neutralizing Abs are primarily strain-specific and target variable regions of Env. As the concentrations of such strain specific Abs increase, neutralization escape variants with mutations in the variable epitopes are selected. A pathogen's molecular surfaces that interact with host receptors (e.g. the CD4 binding site) provide epitopes that contain a relatively conserved set of residues. They can serve as targets for Abs that are able to neutralize a greater diversity of HIV strains. A shield of glycans and immunodominant variable loops can restrict antibody access to these relatively conserved epitopes (Julien et al., 2013;Kwong et al., 2002;Lyumkis et al., 2013;Pancera et al., 2014;Wei et al., 2003;Wyatt et al., 1998). Yet, some HIV-1 infected individuals do develop Abs that focus on such epitopes and neutralize a broad cross section of HIV strains in vitro (Kwong et al., 2013). However, these broadly neutralizing antibodies (bnAbs) are produced only beginning around 2 years after infection, and in only a limited fraction of chronically infected patients. Nonetheless, the emergence of bnAbs in some patients is proof that AM can result in bnAbs. This suggests the tantalizing possibility that appropriately designed immunogens and immunization protocols may be able to elicit bnAbs rapidly in a large fraction of individuals, thus resulting in an effective vaccine. Recent longitudinal tracking of a developing HIV-1 bnAb lineage and the co-evolving virus in a patient showed that extensive, and even specifically directed, viral diversification occurred prior to the development of breadth (cross-reactive Abs) (Gao et al., 2014;Liao et al., 2013), supporting the idea that escape mutants of the virus drive bnAb evolution. More importantly, this observation highlights that induction of bnAbs will likely require immunization with multiple variants of the antigen. When multiple complex antigen variants are used as immunogens, several new questions become important, for example: 1] Which antigen variants should be used as immunogens? 2] What should be the concentrations and temporal order in which they are administered (e.g., cocktails versus sequential)? The answers to these questions are drawn from a huge number of possibilities, and random selection from a large number of combinations of options may not allow sufficient sampling to find efficacious strategies. Intuition is unlikely to guide choices correctly because a mechanistic understanding of how AM occurs in the face of variant or mutating antigens is not available, as past studies have focused on AM in response to single model antigens. This gap in basic immunobiology needs to be addressed. A fundamental understanding of AM induced by several antigen variants that mimic the complexity of how conserved epitopes are shielded on the intact viral spike could be harnessed to design optimal immunogens and immunization protocols for the development of universal vaccines against highly mutable pathogens (e.g. HIV-1, influenza). To take steps toward these goals, we developed an in silico model of AM induced by variant antigens. This stochastic dynamic model enables examination of the key mechanisms and factors that influence AM in the face of variant antigens, and the development of bnAbs. Our calculations predict markedly distinct outcomes if designed antigen (Ag) variants are presented in different concentrations and temporal patterns during immunization. Experiments in mice using model HIV antigens are consistent with these predictions. Thus, our complementary computational and experimental results provide broadly applicable fundamental insights, and a guide for further studies aimed at overcoming roadblocks to the induction of bnAbs against HIV-1 by vaccination. The purpose of our in silico modeling is not quantitative recapitulation of existing experiments, but to provide fundamental mechanistic insights into AM induced by multiple Ag variants and to compare the predicted relative efficacy of different immunization schemes in inducing cross-reactive broadly neutralizing Abs (bnAbs). Two key features not considered before must be incorporated explicitly in such studies; viz., the presence of multiple Ag variants during GC reactions and the molecular complexity of the Ags. To mimic interactions of B cell receptors with complex immunogens such as the HIV-1 trimeric spike, we account for the fact that the conserved protein epitope of desired Abs are partially shielded, and that insertions and deletions in the variable loops can hinder the formation of strong interactions with the conserved residues of the epitopes (e.g. those in the CD4bs). We computationally simulate the dynamics of a typical GC (Figure 1A). The GC reaction (GCR) starts on day 3 (Nieuwenhuis and Opstelten, 1984) after Ag injection, with three B cell blasts (Jacob et al., 1991;Kroese et al., 1987) that barely meet a relatively low affinity threshold, Ea. The qualitative results we report do not depend on the particular value of Easince all other affinities are scaled relative to it. The B cells expand without mutation, reaching a population size of about 1500 cells around day 7(Jacob, 1991). At day 7, AID-mediated somatic hypermutation (SHM) in the immunogloblin (Ig) genes turns on (Kallberg et al., 1996) with a rate of 10-3per base pair per division (Berek and Milstein, 1987). Variations in the time at which SHM begins do not affect our results as we start timing AM processes after this point. Each B cell in the dark zone of the GC (the region where this replication/mutation occurs) replicates twice, and we assume that mutation occurs uniformly, neglecting preferential replacements or hypermutation hotspots (Wagner et al., 1995). We assume that the activated B cells are from an appropriate germline (Kepler et al., 2014). The probability of a functionally silent mutation (no change in affinity) ispS=0.5, the probability that a mutation is lethal (e.g., non-folding) ispL=0.3, and the rest are affinity-affecting mutations (probabilitypA=0.2) (Shlomchik et al., 1998). For affinity-affecting mutations, the affinity of a BCR (i) with a particular type of antigen (j),Eij, is changed. The extent of the change is chosen from a probability distribution characterized by a long tail of deleterious mutations that reduce affinity, as experimental data suggests that favorable mutations are less likely than deleterious ones (Figure S1A). Our BCR-Ag affinity model is defined in a later sub-section. B cells whose re-expressed surface Ig genes do not carry lethal mutations then go through affinity-dependent selection. Two survival signals are required for a B cell to be positively selected. First, the BCR on a B cell must bind to the Ag (immunogen) displayed on the FDC sufficiently strongly to enable internalization. Since processes occur stochastically, in our simulations, B cells internalize Ag with a probability related to the binding affinity of its BCR for the Ag. The greater the difference between the affinity (Eij) of a B cell (i) for its epitope on Agjand a threshold (Ea) required for Ag internalization, the greater the probability of Ag internalization. This probability is described mathematically in analogy with a Langmuir isotherm (Equation 1in Methods). B cells that internalize Ag display antigenic peptides (p) bound to major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules on their surface. T cell receptors expressed on T helper cells can bind to these pMHCs to deliver a key survival signal. B cells compete with each other for the limited availability of T cell help (Victora et al., 2010). T helper cells are specific for peptides derived from the Ag, but they are responsive to diverse pMHCs, not just those derived from the epitope targeted by the BCR. Thus, we assume that the probability of a B cell receiving T cell help is dictated by the amount of internalized Ag, regardless of the identity of its targeted epitope. A B cell that successfully internalizes Ag receives T cell help with a probability that depends upon its probability of internalizing Ag relative to the average probability of internalizing Ag of all the other B cells present in the GC (Equation 2in Methods). A B cell with a high affinity for its target epitope competes better for T cell help. To study AM against Ag variants that may be present simultaneously, we have to confront an issue for which no experimental information exists: when a GC B cell encounters a FDC, with how many types of Ag variants can it simultaneously interact? We consider two scenarios: 1] Each GC B cell interacts with one type of Ag variant during an encounter. 2] Each GC B cell interacts simultaneously with all Ag variants held on the FDCs. We find that which of these scenarios describes the heterogeneity of Ag display on FDCs strongly influences the outcome of AM, indicating the importance of experimental interrogation of this issue. We study two extreme cases of competition for T cell help: 1] GC B cells compete only with contemporary GC B cells ("peers only"). 2] In addition to current GC B cells, all antibodies generated in previous rounds of mutation/selection also participate in the competition ("Ab feedback"). Reality should be bounded by these scenarios. From seminal studies (Oprea and Perelson, 1997), 90% of the selected cells are recirculated to the dark zone. The rest differentiate into equal numbers of Ab-secreting plasma cells and memory cells that can re-expand upon future activation. Ab feedback is provided by objects in our agent-based model with affinities representing these past GC emigrants. As AM proceeds, at first, the number of B cells in the GC decreases. In some cases, all B cells apoptose and the GC extinguishes. In others, upon reaching a population bottleneck, favorable clones emerge, and the number of B cells rises (Zhang and Shakhnovich, 2010). We terminate the GCR once the GC population recovers to the initial size (i.e.~1500 cells), or when an assumed maximum duration of 120 d (or 240 GCR cycles) is reached, whichever comes first. The first condition reflects the fact that an abundance of GC B cells will internalize all the Ag on FDCs. The second condition may reflect antigen decay over time which we do not model explicitly. In classic computational studies focused on GCR stimulated by a single model Ag, B cells were binned into different affinity classes for the Ag (e.g. Kepler and Perelson, 1993). The correlated affinities for different Ag variants require a more detailed description. Other studies have considered mathematical models (such as NK-models) for BCR properties and their Ag affinity which present rugged landscapes for affinity evolution (Deem and Lee, 2003). To unambiguously define affinity to different Ag variants and to consider complex immunogens that reflect features on viral spikes, we developed a coarse-grained model with "residue-level" resolution for key BCR-Ag interactions (Figure 1C). Our model was inspired by the CD4bs on the trimeric HIV-1 viral spike, which is targeted by many monoclonal bnAbs for HIV-1 (Burton et al., 2012). But, it applies to other epitopes which contain highly conserved residues, and can easily be modified to consider other pathogens. We ignore distracting epitopes that do not contain conserved residues because they are less likely to elicit bnAbs. BCRs can potentially make contacts with three types of residues on the viral spike: (1) Highly conserved residues of the epitope (18 such residues in model). (2) Residues representing motifs, such as glycan attachment sites, which, when occupied, can be associated with sterically blocking access to the conserved residues (6 such residues in model). (3) Variable residues, which upon mutation (includes insertions/deletions), can further mask the conserved residues of the epitope. We include 22 such residues from the variable loops of Env which mimic the most mutable sites in the Seaman neutralization test panel (Seaman et al., 2010;Walker et al., 2011) sequences and publicly available Env sequences. Each epitope residue is described in a coarse grained manner, such that it is either the wild type (WT) amino acid or a mutant. The strength of interaction of a residue (k) on BCR (i) with a residue on the epitope is denoted byNone. The binding affinity,ENone, between a B cell cloneh? Noneand a viral strains? Noneis modeled asNoneNoneThe firstMinteractions (i.e. k less than =M) are with variable contact residues on the viral spike, whereskcan be either 1 (WT) or -1 (mutated). The other (N-M) sites (i.e. k greater than M) are conserved residues on the epitope withsk=1. The interaction strengthhkis drawn from a continuous and uniform distribution within a bounded range (details inSupplemental Simulation Methods). Equation 1is, however, just a starting point for the affinity between a particular BCR and Ag, as BCRs do not interact with peptide chains in a linear fashion, and interactions between residues are not independent, asEquation 1may imply. Epitope-paratope interactions are distinctly 3-dimensional, and structural aspects of CD4bs bnAbs also point to the importance of how interactions with some residues on the viral spike might influence interactions with other epitope residues (Zhou et al., 2010). For instance, most CD4bs bnAbs avoid contact with almost the entire V1/V2 loop except for a few conserved residues near the stem, and the very potent VRC01 Ab avoids the V5 loop. This suggests that avoiding interactions with some residues can allow better access and stronger interactions with the conserved residues of the epitope. Furthermore, affinity enhancement of bnAbs (such as VRC01) is influenced by alteration of non-contact residues (Klein et al., 2013). We account for these effects as described below (mathematical details inSupplemental Simulation Methods). BCR mutations that strengthen (weaken) interactions with the residues that shield the conserved residues could result in a decreased (increased) binding strength (value ofhinEquation 1) for a randomly chosen paratope residue that can potentially interact with a conserved residue on the epitope. This feature reflects the fact that BCRs that decrease contacts with shielding residues are more likely to be able to access and make contacts with the protected conserved residues. Current knowledge on Env structures (Julien et al., 2013;Lyumkis et al., 2013;Pancera et al., 2014) indicates that V1 is likely to be a dynamic, unfolded and disordered flexible loop, and mutations in V2, especially insertions/deletions, can hide the conserved residues of a neutralizing epitope. So, paratope alterations that weaken interaction with a mutated variable loop residue result in an increased binding strength (value ofhinEquation 1) for a randomly chosen paratope residue that can potentially interact with a conserved residue on the epitope (Figure 1D), and vice versa. In silico, we study three Ag variants, the WT Ag (only unmutated residues) and two mutants. Of the 22 most mutable residues in the variable loops, 20 residues are mutated in the majority of the 141 Seaman test panel sequences (Figure S1B). As these highly mutated strains are viable, to maximize the number of non-overlapping mutated residues on the Ag variants, we studied two mutant strains with 11 non-overlapping mutations in the variable sites. We also studied variants with 4 and 8 such mutations. We investigate three immunization schemes in silico: 1] Scheme I (WT+v1+v2): WT Ag and two variants administered as a cocktail. 2] Scheme II (WT|v1+v2): Immunization with WT Ag first, followed by administration of the two variants simultaneously. 3] Scheme III (WT|v1|v2): Immunization with WT Ag first, followed by sequential administration of the two variants. In our murine experiments we studied schemes I and III. For each immunization protocol, we simulate many GC reactions. When all steps of immunization and AM are completed, we check whether the affinity of each Ab produced by a GC exceeds a threshold value against each strain in the Seaman panel. The breadth of coverage is defined as the fraction of test panel sequences to which an Ab binds with an above-threshold affinity. We collect statistics from many Abs and simulations, and report results as histograms or probabilities of obtaining Abs with a certain breadth. As many GCs are induced in each vaccinated person, these results reflect the probability of obtaining Abs that exhibit particular breadths of coverage in a typical individual. Immunization with only the WT Ag leads to affinity enhancement on conserved and variable residues alike (Figure S1E). The number of accumulated mutations (7 affinity-affecting mutations in 2 weeks,Figure S1D) and the incremental changes in interaction strength (Figure S1E) are consistent with experiment (Berek et al., 1991;Kocks and Rajewsky, 1988;Wedemayer et al., 1997). Higher affinity clones continuously emerge, producing potent Abs (Figure S2 C and F). For a single Ag, if Ag dose is too low (Figure S2 A-B and D-E, lowestCwt), B cells are unlikely to be selected during GC reactions, the GC collapses, and there is no Ab production. If Ag dose is too high (Figure S2 A-B and D-E, highestCwt), selection is easy, there is little competition between B cells, and GCs are rapidly filled with low affinity clones (Eisen and Siskind, 1964;Goidl et al., 1968). Our agent-based stochastic approach naturally reproduces the inverse correlation between Ag concentration and heterogeneity in Ab affinities (Figure S2 G-H) observed in early experiments (Eisen and Siskind, 1964). For the three immunization schemes with antigen variants, Ag concentration is again a very important variable (Figure 2). If the Ag concentration is too low most GCs collapse as expected. However, there is a curious decline in GC survival and Ab breadth if the Ag concentration is too high for immunization schemes II and III. During AM after immunizing with a high dose of WT Ag, many B cells survive easily and the GC reaction draws to an end quickly. Therefore, these B cells are largely low affinity clones that have not accumulated mutations that enhance contacts with the conserved residues of the epitope. So, upon administering either a cocktail of the two Ag variants or just one variant, these B cells have a small chance of binding sufficiently strongly with the mutants and surviving, and so GCs collapse despite the abundance of Ag. The few Abs produced do not develop breadth as the large number of mutations required to confer breadth do not evolve (see examples inFigure S3). Hereon, for each immunization scheme, we show results for the Ag concentration (listed inTable 1) that yields Abs with a near optimal breadth (peak of red curves inFigure 2). In Scheme III, the chosen concentration is slightly higher to ensure high Ab production. Figure 3Ashows in silico results for the distribution of the breadth of coverage (for the Seeman panel) of Abs produced using immunization Scheme I (cocktail of WT+v1+v2). Ag concentration is fixed to yield the greatest breadth, but two more variables could be important: during selection in the light zone, does a B cell-FDC encounter involve one or all Ag variants? Is "Ab feedback" important during AM? For this immunization scheme, in most scenarios, just a few percent of GCs survive (Table 1); i.e., Ab titers are predicted to be low. To see why, consider first the situation where B cells interact with only one Ag variant during each encounter with FDCs. B cells that bind moderately strongly to one of the three variants seed the GC, and they do not have any strong interactions with the conserved residues of the epitope yet. Now consider a B cell that is selected by a particular Ag variant in an early round, then mutates, and returns to the light zone to encounter a different variant. Without even moderately strong contact with the conserved residues, the probability that such a B cell is cross-reactive to the new variant is small. Thus, apoptosis is the most likely outcome, leading to collapse of the GC. For the rare GCs that do survive, there is evolution of interactions with the conserved residues and dimunition of interactions with variable loops during AM, and this confers some breadth (relative to immunization with WT Ag alone, seeTable 1). If B cells interact with all Ag variants during each encounter with FDCs, and the Ag concentration is chosen to be the one that confers optimal breadth, the percentage of surviving GCs and the distribution of breadth is not very different compared to the case where only one Ag variant is encountered at a time (Figure 3A). However, importantly, the optimal concentration is lower when B cells can interact with all Ag variants. If the Ag concentrations were made the same as when B cells interact with one Ag at a time, then most GCs would survive when all Ag variants are simultaneously encountered (Figure S4B). This is because, in this case, B cells that bind sufficiently strongly to any one Ag variant can progress through AM. As a consequence, the generated Abs are likely to be strain specific. Thus, if Ag is displayed homogeneously on FDCs, for immunization scheme I, optimal conditions for inducing Abs efficiently at high titers would not induce bnAbs. The lower Ag concentration required for optimal breadth results in the survival of only a relatively low fraction of GCs (Figure 3A). We also carried out calculations where the Ag variants differ from each other by only four non-overlapping mutations. When all variants are simultaneously encountered in each interaction with FDCs and Ab feedback is turned on, comparing results for this case (Figure 3B) with that when the variants differ by eleven mutations (Figure 3A), we find that a much higher fraction (10% vs 1%) of GCs succeed in producing Abs (Figure S4D). This is because the Ags vary less from each other, and so the chance of a B cell being cross-reactive to variants in early stages of AM is higher, thus increasing the probability of it being positively selected. The breadth of the Abs produced is not large because many variable residues that are unmutated in the Ag variants are mutated in the test panel sequences, and strain specific Abs are likely to be produced as all Ag variants on FDCs are simultaneously encountered. This is why the total coverage (Figure 3C), defined as the breadth of coverage offered by the polyclonal response from all the Abs, is higher than the average breadth of coverage of individual Abs (Figure 3B). Results for the case where only one Ag variant is encountered at a time on FDCs are shown inFigures 3B and 3C(filled bars), and for no Ab feedback seeTable 1. In our in silico studies of this immunization scheme, we did not find any conditions that result in bnAbs with high probability (Figures S7 and S8). This is because B cell evolution during AM is made difficult by the potentially conflicting selective pressures imposed by Ag variants simultaneously displayed on FDCs. We term this phenomenon,frustrated AM. The degree to which AM is frustrated is controlled by a complex interplay between Ag concentration, heterogeneity of Ag display on the FDCs, the number of mutations that separate the Ag variants, and the extent to which Ab feedback is important. Consider first the situation in which there is no Ab feedback and only one Ag variant is encountered at a time on FDCs (Figure 4Bfilled bars). In the first period of AM induced by the WT Ag, moderately strong contacts with the conserved residues of the epitope can evolve. During AM following immunization with the cocktail, individual B cells have equal chance of encountering either Ag variant during selection. Since the two variants have non-overlapping mutated residues, beneficial BCR mutations for one strain are deleterious for the other. Maturing B cell lineages are frustrated in satisfying these conflicting requirements for selection in successive rounds, but less so than in Scheme I because moderately strong interactions with the conserved residues have evolved during AM driven by the WT Ag prime, resulting in some cross-reactivity. Therefore, a greater fraction (~ 10 %) of GCs survive compared to scheme I. Since a relatively high Ag concentration is required for GC survival in this case (Figure 2Aright panel blue curve), B cells can expand readily and GCRs terminate quickly. Short maturation times limit the average breadth (~35%,Figure 2Aright panel red curve), but Abs with large breadth do evolve with low probability. If there is Ab feedback, lower Ag concentrations still allow GCs to mature successfully. This is because Abs produced in previous rounds of AM often have lower affinities for the encountered Ag than the best clones produced during the current round of mutation and selection. This confers a competitive advantage to these best B cell clones because they are not just competing with each other, but also with the weaker affinity Abs (Supplemental Simulation Methods). Also, the Abs compete effectively with unfavorable mutant cells that may emerge and be stochastically selected only to be extinguished in a future round of mutation-selection. Lowering Ag concentration diminishes the probability of selection in each round, thus allowing AM to proceed for a longer time before all the Ag on FDCs is internalized. This allows mutations that confer breadth to accumulate. This balance of lowering frustration through Ab feedback and increasing frustration by reducing Ag concentration results in a very high survival rate for GCs and considerable breadth in the Ab response (Figure 2Aleft,Figure 4Afilled bars). If multiple Ags are encountered during each interaction with FDCs, the outcome is different (Figures 4A and 4B, unfilled bars). Since a choice of being selected by the same variant (rather than a randomly chosen one of the two) is always available in successive rounds of AM, the frustration is low. In most cases, we find that B cells are selected by one of the variants repeatedly, and so strain-specific Abs are likely to evolve (Table 1). Furthermore, access to both Ag variants allows B cells to multiply successfully in the GC and quickly consume all the Ag on FDCs. The duration of AM is short, so mutations that confer breadth evolve rarely, and the average breadth is no more than 40%, regardless of the extent of Ab feedback (Table 1). For this optimal breadth to develop, the antigen concentrations must be much lower than when only one Ag variant is seen during each B cell-FDC encounter (Figure 2B vs 2A). Our results suggest that this immunization scheme has the potential to produce bnAbs (~ 75 % breadth) with high probability if B cells encounter one Ag variant at a time on FDCs and all Abs produced in previous rounds migrate through ongoing GCs. Rather than the extreme situations of full Ab feedback or none at all, there is some middle ground, and also most likely, B cells encounter one FDC Ag variant in some rounds of selection and all variants during others. Thus, our results suggest that, depending upon circumstances, this immunization scheme produces Abs efficiently with a probability between 10%-80%, and with average breadths ranging from 30 % to 80 % (Table 1). This scheme may be analogous to what ensues in patients who develop bnAbs upon natural infection as they are first exposed to the infecting strain, which then diversifies. However, the sensitivity of our results to varying conditions suggest that it may be quite difficult to induce bnAbs consistently in diverse patients using this immunization scheme. This is because the conditions noted above are likely to vary between and within individuals. Sequential immunization with the the three Ag variants temporally separates the mutually conflicting selective driving forces imposed by multiple variants. Confounding effects associated with whether one or multiple types of Ags participate in each B cell-FDC encounter in the GC are also obviated. Consider first the situation where there is no Ab feedback (Figure 4D). Maturation against the WT Ag results in some strong interactions with the conserved residues. When AM ensues with the first variant, two main types of lineages evolve in the simulations (Figure S5). Both types of lineages tend to reduce interactions with the residues that are mutated in the first variant Ag. But, in one type of lineage, interactions with the unmutated variable residues in the first variant (which are mutated in the second variant) are enhanced; in the other type of lineage, these interactions do not change very much. When the second variant with non-overlapping mutations is introduced, the latter lineages have a good chance of outcompeting the former ones during AM. This is because clones that did not increase their footprint on the variable residues that are now mutated in the second variant can simply reduce interactions with these residues, and focus strongly only on the conserved residues of the epitope. This is why Abs produced in Scheme III exhibit a narrow distribution of very large breadth (Figure 4Dtop panel) rather than a broad distribution of Abs with moderate breadth seen in the analogous situation using Scheme II (Figure 4Btop panel, filled bars). In scheme II, lineages specific for one or the other variant strain have a higher chance of survival. In scheme III, Abs that focus contacts with the conserved residues of the epitope and minimize interactions with all the variable residues are more likely to emerge (Figures 4B and 4D, middle panels). Comparing "Ab feedback" (Figure 4C) and "peers only" scenarios (Figure 4D) in Scheme III, we see that Ab feedback leads to narrower distributions of Abs with large breadth, due to the same effects of Ab feedback noted for Scheme II. As shown inFigures 4E and 4F, the distributions of total coverage for Abs produced by Schemes II and III are very close when there is Ab feedback (Figure 4E), and the average values are both as high as 90%. If there is no Ab feedback (Figure 4F), however, Scheme III gives a similar broad coverage (89%) whereas Scheme II yields a moderate coverage (51%) even with polyclonal responses. So, scheme III is predicted to be more robust to many varying conditions. Our calculations predict that, compared to the other immunization schemes we studied, truly cross-reactive Abs that focus contacts on the conserved residues of the epiope with a small footprint outside are most likely to emerge robustly upon sequential immunization with Ag variants. Immunization with a cocktail of Ags is predicted to result in a significantly worse outcome compared to sequential immunization. We note previous immunization studies that have suggested the advantages of sequential immunization of HIV Env in generating cross-reactive Abs, in further agreement with our computational results (Malherbe et al., 2011;Pissani et al., 2012). Here we tested our predictions comparing sequential immunization and cocktails in mouse studies using precisely engineered Ag variants. It is important to note that the variant Ags we have engineered are gp120 monomers of Env, not trimers. Thus, they cannot be expected to produce bnAbs that neutralize virus particles with intact trimeric spikes. The goal of our experiments was to precisely test whether cross-reactive Abs that focus on the conserved residues of an epitope (CD4bs) are more likely to develop upon sequential immunization, compared to administration of a cocktail of the same immunogens, as per our in silico predictions. As described inExtended Experimental Procedures, we engineered variants of a minimized gp120 core protein immunogen (the "stripped core") that incorporate diversification at 43 surface residues outside the CD4bs, while retaining binding affinity to the VRC01 bnAb (Table S1,Figure S6). These immunogens are designed to present biochemically novel residues outside the CD4bs such that only the desired CD4bs epitope is conserved across all the immunogens. We used four engineered variants (including stripped core) that fit these criteria. Our in silico results should hold irrespective of whether three or four variants are used. BALB/c mice were immunized intranasally with HEK 293-produced immunogens fused to mouse Fc (Figure 5A) with a CpG oligonucleotide adjuvant, following protocols described elsewhere (Ye et al., 2011). Immunogens were administered every two weeks at a total protein dose of 50 pmol. Animals were divided into three groups (Figure 5B). The "Sequential" group of four mice was immunized sequentially with each of the four Ag variants. The "Parallel" group of four mice received a cocktail of all four variants at each administration. The "Core-only" group of two mice was given three doses of the same stripped core immunogen. Serum was collected every week. Serum binding to the Ag variants was assayed by flow cytometry of yeast displaying each of the four variants. Representative curves for each of the three immunization groups are shown inFigures 5C-E. Sequentially-immunized mice exhibit similar binding to each of the four Ag variants, consistent with serum that recognizes and focuses contacts with a shared epitope presented on all variants (Figure 5C). Mice immunized with a cocktail of four variants show a broader spread of binding affinities, consistent with dominant serum specificities for some variants but not others (Figure 5D). In the mouse represented, for example, it appears that the serum recognizes the epitope on stripped core that is not present on Clones A or C. Serum from mice immunized only with stripped core bind strongly to stripped core but not to the other immunogens, consistent with our immunogen design objective that the four variants not share common surface residues outside the CD4bs (Figure 5E), like the non-overlapping mutations in Ag variants in our calculations. Serum specificity for the CD4bs was determined in two ways. First, we measured the binding of serum to the stripped core mutant D368R, which is known to disrupt the binding of several CD4bs-directed Abs (Thali et al., 1992). Serum samples collected after the third and fourth immunizations were incubated at a 1:100 dilution with yeast displaying either stripped core or the D368R mutant (Figure 6A). For mice from the sequential immunization group, the fractional binding of serum to D368R was similar to that of VRC01 at saturating concentrations. Of the mice that were immunized with a cocktail of all four immunogens, three are very sensitive to D368R after three immunizations but appear to lose this specificity by the fourth administration. A second assay used to determine specificity was to evaluate the simultaneous binding of VRC01 and serum antibodies to gp120 (Methods). The assay was performed first by pre-incubating the gp120 with mouse serum before introducing VRC01-displaying yeast (Figure 6B). If serum antibodies compete with VRC01 for its binding site, the gp120-serum complex will not bind to the yeast. No binding signal was observed for any of the serum samples, suggesting that all contained some fraction of VRC01-competitive antibodies. This result is consistent with the D368R gp120 binding results discussed above. The same assay was then performed by pre-incubating gp120 with VRC01 yeast before introducing the serum (Figure 6C) to determine whether the serum contains any specificity other than to the CD4bs. Note that due to plasmid loss in yeast during culture, ~60% positive cells is the maximum observable signal in the assay. Mice immunized with just stripped core (53%, 56%) or with a cocktail of four Ags (mean = 32% +/- 5%) developed antibodies that bind to other epitopes on gp120. However, mice immunized sequentially did not (mean = 1.0% +/- 0.3%). These experiments suggest that sequential immunization with Ag variants elicited a serum response that was VRC01-competitive and entirely focused on the conserved residues targeted by the VRC01 Ab. Mice that were exposed to a cocktail of the variants generated some VRC01-competitive antibodies, but also Abs that targeted non-conserved residues on a single immunogen, i.e. were not cross-reactive. In other words, only sequential immunization robustly elicited a response that is focused on the conserved residues of the desired epitope. These findings are in harmony with our in silico results. To establish that individual CD4bs-competitive antibodies were generated by sequential immunization, hybridomas were generated by splenotypic fusion from a mouse immunized using this protocol. Two distinct gp120-binding monoclonal antibodies were isolated (for sequences, seeExtended Experimental Procedures). The antibodies both targeted the CD4bs epitope, as both were disrupted by the D368R mutation (at 10 nM antibody, fractional binding to D368R vs. stripped core gp120 of 1.4% and 15.6%) and neither was able to bind to stripped core that had been pre-blocked with VRC01 (Figure 6D). These data make clear that the monoclonal antibodies are indeed focused on the CD4bs upon sequential immunization with the variant antigens. The induction of bnAbs against highly mutable pathogens, such as HIV and influenza, will require immunization with Ag variants. Rational design of immunogens and efficient immunization protocols that elicit bnAbs requires mechanistic understanding of a basic problem in immunobiology: viz., how AM occurs in the presence of variant Ags. Our studies of AM in this setting have revealed new concepts, suggested new avenues for experimental and theoretical research, and have practical value. An important concept that emerges is that, when multiple Ag variants are used as immunogens, they can present conflicting selection forces during AM which frustrates the evolution of Abs. This phenomenon is most acutely manifested upon immunization with a cocktail of Ag variants. In this case, a B cell of a particular lineage that is selected in one round by a particular Ag variant is likely, after the next round of mutation, to encounter a different Ag variant on FDCs. This B cell is unlikely to be positively selected in this encounter, thus ending the evolution of a potentially favorable B cell lineage. The degree to which AM is frustrated is determined by a complex interplay of effects dependent on Ag concentration, how heterogeneously Ag variants are displayed on FDCs, the number of mutations that separate the Ag variants, and the extent to which previously generated Abs migrate through ongoing GCs. Our results provide empirical evidence that these parameters can be tuned to achieve an optimal level of frustration. Too much frustration prevents GC reactions from evolving favorable mutations that confer breadth. Too low a level of frustration (the extreme case being immunization with one Ag) results in the development of strain-specific antibodies. An avenue for future theoretical research is to define a quantitative metric of frustration that describes precisely how the degree of frustration depends on the pertinent variables. The metric of frustration could then be optimized to design effective immunization protocols. Our in silico results suggest that if one primes with the WT Ag, and then boosts with a cocktail of variants, bnAbs can emerge, but only if some special conditions hold. Such a scenario may have been the driver of bnAb production in naturally infected patients because this immunization strategy mimics natural infection with one strain and subsequent viral diversification. However, our results show that deviations from these special conditions make the evolution of bnAbs unlikely in this setting (Table 1). This suggests that potent bnAbs evolve during natural infection only when special conditions are met, which happens rarely and thus take a long time to emerge by chance. Controlling immunization protocols precisely to satisfy special conditions in every vaccinated individual seems difficult. Furthermore, even if the conditions were set to perfectly mimic a situation that resulted in the evolution of bnAbs upon natural infection, the outcome may not be favorable because Darwinian evolution is inherently stochastic and cannot be replicated exactly. So, although it is important to understand how bnAbs are produced during natural infection, mimicking these conditions may not be an efficient way to induce bnAbs by vaccination. We find that when Ag variants are administered sequentially, bnAbs can develop with relatively high probability over a wider range of conditions than if other strategies are deployed (Table 1, andFigures 2-4). In this case, the conflicting selection forces due to the variant Ags are temporally separated. This can lead to successful evolution of multiple B cell lineages that first develop moderate interactions with the conserved residues of the epitope, and then progressively acquire mutations that evade contacts with one set of variable residues, and then another. Evolution of a set of possible clones which have a chance at maturing into bnAbs after AM against the first variant makes success more likely as all of them are unlikely to go extinct during stochastic mutation and selection upon immunizing with the second variant. Our in silico results predict that this immunization strategy is superior to immunization with a cocktail of the same set of variants, and our model experiments in mice support this prediction. Sequential immunization with Ag variants that share a single epitope to induce B cells specific for the common epitope has been tried with linear peptide epitopes derived from HIV gp41, though the resulting Abs were non-neutralizing (Guenaga et al., 2011;Correia et al., 2010). Past work also emphasizes the importance of masking irrelevant epitopes, but by itself, this strategy is insufficient for succesful vaccination (Pantophlet et al., 2003;Selvarajah et al., 2005). Our in silico and in vivo studies suggest that precisely engineered variant intact virus spike immunogens administered in a sequential fashion under appropriate conditions may offer the best opportunities for induction of bnAbs against HIV-1 and other highly mutable pathogens. The probability of a B cell internalizing antigen is given by:NoneNoneHereCjis the concentration of Ag of typejpresented on the FDCs. The sum over the Ag indexjruns throughnNonedistinct types of Ags that B cellicould potentially interact with simultaneously during an encounter with a FDC bearing multiple Ag variants. The proability of a B cell to succeed in receiving T cell help is given by:NoneNonewhereNoneis the average probability of internalizing Ag of all the other B cells present in the GC. Noneis the total Ag concentration, and the dependence on this variable accounts for the observation that the number of activated T helper cells increases with Ag dose, thus making it more likely that B cells receive T cell help. Yeast displaying the scFv of VRC01 was incubated with soluble stripped core gp120 and an excess of mouse antiserum. The formation of a ternary complex-a sandwich of VRC01, gp120, and mouse serum-was detected as the presence of mouse antibodies on yeast by flow cytometry (% positive cells). The experiment was done in two ways as described in text. See Extended Supplement Methods for additional information