Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is the most common type of kidney cancer, with metastatic disease often responsible for the death of patients (LipworthNone, 2006). Both hereditary and sporadic RCC are characterised by the inactivation of the Von-Hippel Lindau (VHL) gene, which results in hyperactivity of the hypoxia inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) and production of angiogenic factors, such as vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and platelet-derived growth factor (Gossage and Eisen 2010). Therefore, several biological agents with antiangiogenic activity have been approved for treatment of metastatic RCC: inhibitors of VEGF, such as bevacizumab, of its receptors (VEGF-Rs), such as the multiple tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) sorafenib, sunitinib, pazopanib and axitinib, and of the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), such as everolimus and temsirolimus (MotzerNone, 2007;EscudierNone, 2007;MotzerNone, 2007;HudesNone, 2007;MotzerNone, 2008;SternbergNone, 2010;RiniNone, 2011). The mTOR kinase regulates cell growth, metabolism, proliferation and motility by integrating a variety of signals that reflect cellular growth stimuli, nutrient availability and energy status (GibbonsNone, 2009). The PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway has important roles in the response of cells to hypoxia and energy depletion, and these functions are relevant for the growth of RCC, which is characterised by alterations of theVHLgene (Hudes, 2009). The immune modulatory oligonucleotides (IMOs) are second-generation agonists of Toll-like receptor 9 (TLR9), a receptor recognising unmethylated CpG dinucleotides and initiating potent Th1-type innate and adaptive immune responses (Krieg, 2006;Agrawal and Kandimalla, 2007). Toll-like receptor 9 agonists are synthetic oligodeoxynucleotides containing CpG motifs, developed as immunoprotective or antiallergic agents, vaccine adjuvants, antitumour agents (Krieg, 2006). They potentiate antitumour immune responses through activation of NK, dendritic and cytotoxic T cells, increased production of antitumour cytokines, and enhancement of antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC). We previously demonstrated that the TLR9 agonist IMO potentiates the ADCC activity of the anti-epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) monoclonal antibody (mAb) cetuximab (DamianoNone, 2007) and the anti-HER-2 mAb trastuzumab (DamianoNone, 2009) inin vivomodels of colorectal and breast cancers, respectively. Beside this immunomodulating function, IMO impairs EGFR signaling and potently synergisesin vivowith anti-EGFR agents (DamianoNone, 2006). Finally, this agent cooperatesin vivowith the anti-VEGF mAb bevacizumab in colorectal cancer models by affecting endothelial cell functions (DamianoNone, 2009). These findings opened the path to the ongoing clinical studies combining TLR9 agonists with EGFR inhibitors in cancer patients (http://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT01040832). As successful therapeutic interventions in cancer are currently based on a multitargeting approach, we tested the combination of IMO and everolimus on models of human RCC with differentVHLgene status. We evaluated the activity of these agents bothin vitroandin vivo, in RCC tumour xenografts. Moreover, we studied their direct antiangiogenic effects by using the human umbilical vein endothelial cell (HUVEC) model. IMO, 5'-TCTGACRTTCT-X-TCTTRCAGTCT-3' (X and R are glycerol linker and 2'-deoxy-7-deazaguanosine, respectively), was synthesised with phosphorothioate backbone, purified and analysed as described (KandimallaNone, 2003). Everolimus was provided by Novartis International AG (Basel, Switzerland). Human ACHN, 769-P, 786-O, Caki-2 RCC cell lines and human HUVEC endothelial cells were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC). All cell lines were cultured as previously described (Biancoet al, 2008a). Cells (104cells per well) were suspended in 0.3% Difco Noble agar (Difco, Detroit, MI) supplemented with complete medium, layered over 0.8% agar medium base layer and treated with different concentrations of IMO or everolimus. After 10-14 days, cells were stained with nitro blue tetrazolium (Sigma Chemical Co., Milan, Italy) and colonies greater than 0.05 mm were counted. Cells (104cells per well) were grown in 24-well plates and exposed to increasing doses of IMO or everolimus, alone or in combination. The percentage of cell survival was determined using the 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay according to manufacturer's instructions. The combination effect of the two drugs was evaluated based on the combination index (CI), calculated using Calcusyn software (Biosoft, Cambridge, UK) and defined as follows: CI=(D)1/(Dx)1+(D)2/(Dx)2+(D)1(D)2/(Dx)1(Dx)2, where: (Dx)1is the dose of Drug 1 alone required to produce anX% effect; (D)1is the dose of Drug 1 required to produce the sameX% effect in combination with Drug 2; (Dx)2is the dose of Drug 2 alone required to produce anX% effect; and (D)2is the dose of Drug 2 required to produce the sameX% effect in combination with Drug 1. The combination effect was defined as follows: CI 1, synergistic effect; CI=1, additive effect; and CI 1, antagonistic effect. Total protein extracts obtained from cell cultures or tumour specimens were resolved by 4-15% SDS-PAGE and probed with anti-human, polyclonal pEGFR, polyclonal EGFR, monoclonal pMAPK, monoclonal MAPK, monoclonal HIF-1, monoclonal VEGF (Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, CA, USA), polyclonal pAkt, polyclonal Akt, polyclonal pp70S6K, polyclonal p70S6K (Cell Signaling Technologies, Beverly, MA, USA) and monoclonal actin (Sigma-Aldrich, Milan, Italy). Immunoreactive proteins were visualised by enhanced chemiluminescence (Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA). Densitometry was performed by using Image J software. VEGF concentrations in conditioned media from tumour cells were determined by ELISA. The absorbance was measured at 490 nm on a microplate reader (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA) and VEGF concentrations were determined using linear regression analysis (Biancoet al, 2008a). Five-week-old Balb/cAnNCrlBR athymic (nu+/nu+) mice (Charles River Laboratories, Milan, Italy) maintained in accordance with institutional guidelines of the University of Naples Animal Care Committee and in accordance to the Declaration of Helsinki were injected subcutaneously (s.c.) with ACHN or 786-O human RCC cells (107cells per mice) resuspended in 200 mul of Matrigel (Collaborative Biomedical Products, Bedford, MA, USA). Seven days after tumour cells injection, tumour bearing mice were randomly assigned (n=6 per group) to receive the following: 1 mg kg-1of IMO intraperitoneally (i.p.) three times a week for 3 weeks; 5 mg kg-1of everolimusper os(by gavage) three times a week for 3 weeks; or the combination of these agents. Tumour diameter was assessed with a Vernier caliper, and tumour volume (cm3) was measured using the formulapi/6 * larger diameter * (smaller diameter)2(RosaNone, 2011). Ninety-six-microwell bacterial culture plates were pre-coated with bovine serum albumin or Matrigel. After 1 h, all coating solutions were removed and 2 * 104HUVECs per well were plated in the presence of IMO, everolimus or their combination. Following incubation for 1 h at 37 degrees C in 5% CO2, cells were fixed and stained with a formalin/ethanol/crystal violet solution. The readings were done at 595 nm and the values were normalised to background adhesion (Biancoet al, 2008a). HUVEC monolayers grown to confluence on gridded plastic dishes were wounded by scratching with a 10-mul pipette tip and then cultured in the presence or absence of doxorubicin, IMO, everolimus or their combination. Doxorubicin was used as a negative control. The wounds were photographed (10 * objective) at 0, 24 and 48 h, and healing was quantified by measuring the distance between the edges (v.8.0.1; Adobe Systems, Inc.). The results are presented as the percentage of the total distance of the original wound enclosed by cells (Biancoet al, 2008a). Matrigel diluted in DMEM was added into a 30-mm culture dish and incubated at 37 degrees C for 30 min; then HUVECs (4 * 105) were added in each dish, in the presence of IMO, everolimus or their combination. The positive control was Matrigel with VEGF 100 ng ml-1(R D Systems, Minneapolis, MN, USA). Pictures were taken at 0 and 24 h (Biancoet al, 2008b). The Student'st-test was used to evaluate the statistical significance of thein vitroresults. The statistical significance of differences in tumour growth was determined by one-way ANOVA and Dunnett's multiple comparison post-test, that of differences in survival by a log-rank test. All reportedP-values were two-sided. All analyses were performed with the BMDP New System statistical package version 1.0 for Microsoft Windows (BMDP Statistical Software, Los Angeles, CA, USA). We used a panel of different RCC cell lines. ACHN cells derived from pleural effusion of a renal cell adenocarcinoma. 769-P, 786-O and Caki-2 cells derived from renal primary clear cell carcinomas. However, evaluation of nude mouse tumours formed by Caki-2 cells in orthotopic and s.c. implantations were consistent with cystic papillary RCC (KovacsNone, 1997;KaramNone, 2011). According to Sanger Institute catalogue of somatic mutations in cancer (*COSMIC database, Catalogue of Somatic Mutations In Cancer,http://www.sanger.ac.uk/) and to previous studies (AshidaNone, 2002;ShinojimaNone, 2007), ACHN cells are wild type, whereas the other cell lines are mutant for theVHLgene. Consistently with theirVHLstatus, ACHN cells secrete lower VEGF levels than other cell lines, both when cultured in complete medium or in serum-free medium after stimulation with EGF (Supplementary Figure 1A). We first analysed thein vitrosensitivity of RCC cell lines to the TLR9 agonist IMO and the mTOR inhibitor everolimus through soft agar growth assay. IMO inhibited anchorage-independent growth of the analysed cell lines, particularly Caki-2 cells, with a dose-response effect (Supplementary Figure 1B). All the RCC cell lines are highly sensitive to everolimus, exhibiting an IC50value ?0.1 muM (Supplementary Figure 1C). We studied the effect of the combined treatment IMO plus everolimus on survival of RCC cell lines. Everolimus was more effective than IMO in inhibiting cell survival, whereas the most potent effect was observed with the combination of the two agents (Figure 1). To better evaluate the interaction and the possible cooperativity between IMO and everolimus, we performed a combination analysis and generated CI and CI-effect plots, according toChou and Talalay (1984), using an automated calculation software. Based on this mathematical model, synergistic conditions occur when the CI is below 1.0. When the CI is less than 0.5, the combination is highly synergistic. Figure 1demonstrates a strong synergism of action of IMO in combination with everolimus in all the cell lines (CI=0.31 for ACHN; CI=0.29 for 769-P; CI=0.12 for 786-O; CI=0.45 for Caki-2). As we previously demonstrated that IMO is able to interfere with EGFR signaling (DamianoNone, 2006, 2009), and mTOR is a key transducer downstream to PI3K/Akt pathway, we analysed the effect of the combined treatment on EGFR-dependent signal transduction. In all the RCC cell lines, EGF stimulation induces the phosphorylation/activation of EGFR, its transducers Akt and MAPK, and the mTOR transducer p70S6K. Everolimus efficiently inhibited EGF-dependent phosphorylation of p70S6K in all the cell lines, without affecting or even inducing phosphorylation of Akt and MAPK. Particularly, as confirmed through densitometry, everolimus induces activation of Akt in 769-P and Caki-2 cells and activation of MAPK in 769-P cells (Supplementary Figure 2). In ACHN cells, IMO inhibited EGFR signaling, reducing pEGFR, pAkt, pp70S6K and pMAPK levels. Also in Caki-2 cells, IMO was able to interfere with EGFR-dependent signal transduction. In ACHN and Caki-2 cells, the combined treatment IMO plus everolimus produced a further inhibition of EGFR signal transduction compared with the single-agent treatments, with an almost total suppression of pp70S6K levels (Figure 2A). As both IMO and everolimus showed antiangiogenic effects in previous studies (DamianoNone, 2007; Biancoet al, 2008b), we evaluated their capability to interfere with VEGF production and secretion by cancer cells. As shown inFigure 2B, we found that IMO and everolimus were able to reduce VEGF levels in the conditioned media from all RCC cell lines, and the combined treatment was more effective that the single agents. Balb/C nude mice xenografted with ACHN or 786-O tumours were treated with IMO or everolimus, alone or in combination (Figure 3). Untreated mice xenografted withVHLwild-type ACHN cells reached the maximum allowed tumour size of about 2 cm3on day 42, 6 weeks after tumour injection. At this time point, both IMO and everolimus produced 80% growth inhibition, whereas the combined treatment produced 96% growth inhibition. IMO-treated mice reached the tumour size of 2 cm3on day 98, 10 weeks after treatment withdrawal, whereas mice treated with everolimus did not reach this size until the end of experiment, on day 119. The combination of IMO plus everolimus caused a potent and long-lasting cooperative antitumour activity, with 50% growth inhibition (tumour size of 0.95 cm3) until the end of the experiment. Comparison of tumour sizes among different treatment groups, evaluated by the one-way ANOVA test, was statistically significant (Figure 3A). Accordingly, mice treated with IMO or everolimus showed a statistically significantly prolonged median survival compared with control mice (IMOvscontrol, median survival 66vs31 days, hazard ratio=0.08317, 95% CI=0.02373-0.2915,P=0.0001; everolimusvscontrol, median survival 87vs31 days, hazard ratio=0.06272, 95% CI=0.01717-0.2292,P less than 0.0001). The IMO plus everolimus group did not reach a median survival, as 60% of the mice were still alive at the end of the experiment (Figure 3B). We then studied the effect of treatments on the expression of proteins playing a critical role in cancer cell proliferation and angiogenesis. Western blotting analysis was performed on lysates from tumours removed at the end of the third week of treatment, on day 25. As shown inFigure 3C, both IMO and everolimus as single agents reduced the activated forms of Akt, MAPK and p70S6K as well as the expression of HIF-1 and VEGF. IMO in combination with everolimus was more effective in inhibiting signaling activation, totally suppressing HIF-1 and VEGF levels. In control mice xenografted withVHLmutant 786-O cells, the maximum allowed tumour size of about 2 cm3was reached on day 49, 7 weeks after tumour injection. At this time point, everolimus produced about 80% of growth inhibition, whereas IMO treatment produced 97% growth inhibition. At the end of the experiment, on day 119, everolimus-treated mice still showed 12% growth inhibition. Interestingly, IMO caused a potent and long-lasting antitumour activity, with 60% growth inhibition, and the combined treatment produced 80% growth inhibition (tumour size of 0.4 cm3) until the end of the experiment. Comparison of tumour sizes among different treatment groups was statistically significant (Figure 3D). Mice treated with everolimus showed a statistically significantly prolonged median survival compared with control mice (everolimusvscontrol, median survival 96vs35 days, hazard ratio=0.07340, 95% CI=0.02061-0.2613,P less than 0.0001). IMO and IMO plus everolimus groups did not reach a median survival, as at the end of the experiment 60% and 80% of mice, respectively, were still alive (Figure 3E). Western blotting analysis on tumour lysates revealed that IMO reduced the activated forms of signal transducers as well as the expression of HIF-1 and VEGF, whereas everolimus induced the activation of MAPK (Figure 3FandSupplementary Figure 3). However, the combined treatment strongly inhibited signaling activation, with a significant reduction of HIF-1 and VEGF levels (Figure 3F). Immunohistochemical analysis performed on tumour samples removed on day 25 revealed that both IMO and everolimus interfere with tumour cell proliferation, but mostly with functions of different populations of tumour microenvironment, particularly endothelial cells (data not shown). No treatment-related side effects were observed in either tumour models studied. Based on the known antiangiogenic properties of IMO and everolimus, and on the potentin vivoantitumour activity of their combination, we investigated thein vitroeffect of the combined treatment on HUVEC human endothelial cells. We found that IMO plus everolimus synergistically inhibited HUVEC survival: Chou and Talalay analysis revealed a CI value of 0.53 (Figure 4A, B). Western blot analysis on HUVEC lysates showed that both IMO and everolimus were able to interfere with signal transduction, but the combined treatment was more effective than the single agents, strongly reducing Akt, p70S6K and MAPK phosphorylation/activation (Figure 4C). We then analysed the effects of the two agents on the main endothelial cell functions involved in the angiogenic process. Specific assays demonstrated that IMO was more effective than everolimus in inhibiting adhesion to basement membrane (Figure 4D), migration (Figure 4E) and capillary formation (Figure 4F). However, the combined treatment caused the most potent inhibition, with an almost total suppression of capillary tubes and network formation (Figure 4). Based on the efficacy of treatment with antiangiogenic agents in patients with RCC, several clinical studies are now evaluating the antitumour activity of different combinations of these agents (http://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT01122615;http://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT01243359). However, the understanding of the biological mechanisms by which these agents may cooperate in cancer patients may help to develop rationale-based combinations and maximise therapeutic effects. To address this issue, we evaluated the combination of everolimus, an inhibitor of mTOR approved for treatment of RCC (MotzerNone, 2008), with the TLR9 agonist IMO inin vitroandin vivomodels of human RCC with differentVHLstatus. This combination may have rationale for clinical use in RCC therapy. In fact, TLR9 expression has been reported as common in RCC, where it is associated with better prognosis. The favourable influence of TLR9 expression on the course of the disease may be based on the immunologic response generated to the renal carcinoma cells (RonkainenNone, 2011). Moreover,both everolimus and IMO are antitumour agents able to interfere not only with tumour cells, but also with different populations of tumour microenvironment. Particularly, we previously demonstrated that IMO synergises with bevacizumab in colorectal cancer models, inhibiting functions of VEGF-stimulated endothelial cellsin vitroand microvessel formationin vivo(DamianoNone, 2007). The capability of IMO to interfere with tumour angiogenesis could be particularly useful in RCC. Consistently, different TLR9 agonists including IMO have been tested in multicenter phase I/II studies in patients with advanced RCC (KuzelNone, 2009;ThompsonNone, 2009). To date, no clinical trials using the combination of a mTOR inhibitor with a TLR-9 agonist have been performed. In the present study, we selected human RCC cell lines with both wild-type and mutantVHLgene. On these models, we found that either IMO or everolimus inhibits cell growth and survival, and the combined treatment produces a synergistic effect. Consistently with the evidence that IMO is able to interfere with EGFR signaling (DamianoNone, 20062009) and that mTOR is a key transducer downstream to PI3K/Akt pathway (GibbonsNone, 2009), IMO and everolimus in combination efficiently interfered with EGFR-dependent signaling, with an almost total suppression of pp70S6K levels in two of the four studied cell lines. Moreover, although everolimus induces Akt and MAPK activation in some cell lines due to loss of the mTOR-S6K-dependent negative feedback regulation on PI3K/Akt and MAPK/Ras pathways (Shaw and Cantley, 2006), IMO plus everolimus could counteract this event. As hypothesised on the basis of the described antiangiogenic effect of the two agents, the combined treatment efficiently reduced also VEGF secretion in all RCC cells. In RCC tumour xenografts, bothVHLwild-type or mutant, IMO plus everolimus caused a potent and long-lasting cooperative antitumour activity with strong reduction of tumour growth, significant prolongation of mice survival and potent inhibition of signal transduction. We were unable to study the effects of the combination on metastatic process because RCC cell lines did not produce distant metastasis when injected subcutaneously (KobayashiNone, 2012; data not shown). The antitumour activity of IMO was particularly evident in theVHLmutant 786-O model, with a 60% tumour growth inhibition at the end of the experiment. This event may depend on IMO effects on tumour microenvironment rather than on tumour cells. This hypothesis is consistent with the lack of IMO activity in inhibiting signal transduction of 786-O cellsin vitro. Moreover, the contribution of angiogenesis to tumour growth could be higher in theVHLmutant compared with the wild-type model. Through functional studies on HUVECs, we clarified that the antiangiogenic effect observed with the combinationin vivocould be related not only to the reduction of VEGF secretion by cancer cells but also to a direct inhibitory effect on endothelial cells. In fact, IMO and everolimus, both as single agents or in combination, impaired the main endothelial cell functions, such as adhesion to basement membrane, migration and capillary formation. Taken together, our results demonstrated that a combined treatment with IMO and everolimus is effective inVHLwild-type and mutant models of RCC by interfering with both cancer cells and microenvironment. Therefore, IMO plus everolimus could represent a potentially effective, rationale-based combination to be translated in the clinical setting.