The regulation of the size of the adipose tissue is critical for lipid storage thus preventing an oversupply of lipid to ectopic tissues such as skeletal muscle, liver and heart where it leads to insulin resistance (1,2). Adipogenesis and cell lipid accumulation are important processes controlling adipose mass. Multiple genes play a role in adipose tissue lipid accumulation (3,4). Suh et al. (5) observed that PPAR-gamma2 action, a critical factor involved in adipogenesis, is suppressed by an anti-obesity gene named adipose (adp, WDTC1 or DCAF9). The gene was originally identified inDrosophila, in which a loss of activity increases fat storage (6,7). Similarly,adpoverexpression in 3T3-L1 adipose cells led to strong inhibition of lipid accumulation (5), while fat tissue-specific transgenic mice were leaner and had enhanced glucose tolerance. In contrast, heterozygous mice (adp+/-) or mice overexpressing a dominant negative form of the gene were obese and glucose intolerant (5). In humans, the potential role ofadp(or its ortholog gene) on adiposity or energy metabolism is unknown. Lai et al. (8) reported that homozygote and heterozygote carriers of a major allele ofadpwere heavier than non-carrier subjects. To provide insight about the relevance of theadpgene in human energy balance, we studied the relationship between subcutaneous adipose tissueadpexpression, body composition and energy metabolism in samples from 3 independent studies. This study included volunteers from studies conducted at Pennington Biomedical Research Center, Baton Rouge (Look AHEAD Adipose Ancillary and ADAPT studies), University of Pittsburgh (Look AHEAD), St. Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center, New York (Look AHEAD) and Obesity and Diabetes Clinical Research Section, NIDDK, Phoenix (Pima Indian study). All subjects provided written informed consent. The subjects' characteristics are shown inTable 1. Adipose tissue samples were available from 3 different studies:NoneAdipose AncillaryNoneType 2 diabetic (n=56) were recruited from the Look AHEAD study (9) and compared to non-diabetic weight-stable volunteers (n=36) matched for body mass index (BMI), sex and race. NoneHealthy weight-stable volunteers (45 males, 17 females) were recruited. Females and males had similar age and BMI but differed in percent body fat. None. Obese (n=18) and non-obese (n=19), non-diabetic volunteers of similar age and from both sexes were recruited. Ninety two volunteers were admitted on the evening preceding the metabolic studies. Body fat mass was measured on a Hologic DXA (QDR 4500; Hologic, Waltham, MA). After a standardized dinner and overnight fast, ~500 mg of adipose tissue was obtained from the superficial abdominal subcutaneous adipose layer under local anesthesia through an aspiration biopsy needle. All samples were washed before snap freezing in liquid nitrogen. Another 50-mg sample was placed in osmium tetraoxide for fat cell size determination. Adipose tissue samples were shipped to the Pennington Center for fat cell size and gene expression analyses. One hour later, resting metabolic (RMR) was determined by indirect calorimetry for 30 minutes (10). After blood drawing, a hyperinsulinemic clamp (80 mU/m2/min) was initiated and continued for 3 hours (10) with plasma glucose maintained at ~100 mg/dl. The mean rate of exogenous glucose infusion during steady-state was corrected for changes in glycemia and divided by the estimated metabolic body size (fat-free mass [FFM] + 17.7) to assess insulin sensitivity (11). For the last 30-minute period of the clamp, RMR was repeated. Nonewas designed to examine inter-individual differences in fat oxidation on an isoenergetic high-fat diet (12). After screening, 62 participants presented at the Pennington Center after refraining from vigorous physical activity for 48 h. After an overnight fast, a hyperinsulinemic clamp (80 mU/m2/min) was initiated and continued for 3 hours with glucose maintained at ~90 mg/dl. Body composition was measured by DXA (QDR 4500; Hologic, Waltham, MA) and glucose disposal rate was adjusted for estimated metabolic body size. Adipose tissue biopsies were performed as described above. None,37 non-diabetic healthy Pima Indians on no medications were admitted to the clinical research unit at the NIDDK in Phoenix and placed on a weight maintaining diet. Body fat was assessed by DXA (Lunar, Madison, WI) and adipose tissue biopsies were performed at least 5 days after admission as described above. Samples were then shipped to Pennington Center for gene expression analysis. Adipose tissue was homogenized and total RNA extracted using a kit from Qiagen (Valencia, CA). Taqman Real PCR technique was performed after cDNA preparation by the one-step reverse transcriptase method. mRNA levels ofadpand cyclophilin B genes were then quantified (Applied Biosystem, Foster City, CA). Each sample was run in duplicate and normalized for cyclophilin B transcript level. Cyclophilin B expression was not different between type 2 diabetic and non-diabetic subjects, race and gender. Primer and probe sequences foradpwere: (F) 5'CGCATGATCCATAACCACAGAAAG3', (R) 5'GGTGACCTGCTACGTAATACTGG3' and (P) 5'CAGAGCCCTTCAGCGGGTGTGCAC3'. Data are presented as means +/- SE. Analyses were performed using SAS version 9.1.3 (SAS Institute, Cary, NC). Differences inadp/cycB and other variables were analyzed by covariance analysis. Because we observed an independent effect of the Study (Look AHEAD, ADAPT and Pima Indians), we analyzed the three studies separately. Included covariates included sex and diabetes status, and their interaction in theLook AHEAD Adipose Ancillary Study; sex in theADAPT study; and sex, obesity and their interaction in thePima Indian study. When the mixed model provided significant effects, post-hoc Tukey-Kramer test were used. Spearman correlation analysis assessed relationships betweenadpand metabolic variables. Statistical significance was 5%. In theLook AHEAD Adipose Ancillary Study, subcutaneous fatadpexpression was not different in type 2 diabetic vs. non-diabetic subjects (p=0.18;Table 1), whereas, loweradpexpression was observed in females vs. males (p less than 0.01;Table 1). However, the difference inadpexpression between sexes disappeared after controlling for body fat mass. In the whole group, an inverse association betweenadpexpression and percent body fat was found (r=-0.23; p=0.03;Figure 1A). adpexpression was also inversely associated with fat cell size (r=-0.24; p=0.03), fasting plasma insulin (r=-0.34; p less than 0.01) and fasting plasma FFA (r=-0.30; p less than 0.01). In contrast,adpexpression correlated positively with insulin-stimulated glucose disposal rate (r=0.23; p=0.03. Figure 1B), respiratory quotient (RQ) in fasting (r=0.31; p less than 0.01) and insulin-stimulated (r=0.33; p less than 0.01) conditions. Since the above relationships may be influenced by body fat and diabetes status, we analyzed the data in each group after adjusting for body fat. Adpexpression remained correlated with insulin-stimulated glucose disposal rate (r=0.28; p=0.04) and RQ (fasting: r=0.46, p less than 0.01; insulin-stimulated: r=0.37, p less than 0.01) only in type 2 diabetic participants. We confirmed some of these observations in thePima Indian Study. For instance, subcutaneous fatadpexpression was lower in females vs. males (0.77 +/- 0.05 vs. 1.00 +/- 0.05; p=0.02), andadpexpression was lower in obese vs. non-obese individuals (0.80 +/- 0.06 vs. 1.02 +/- 0.05; p=0.03) (Table 1). However, we failed to confirm our findings in non-obese individuals in theADAPT Study. In this leaner group,adpexpression did not differ between females and males (p=0.81) and was not related to fat cell size (r=-0.13; p=0.31), fasting insulin (r=0.02; p=0.91), fasting FFA (r=0.05; p=0.68) or percent body fat (r=-0.08; p=0.55). In this study, we assessed the relationship of human abdominal subcutaneous fatadpexpression with adiposity, insulin sensitivity and energy metabolism. Adipose tissue samples were available from three different studies: i) obese with and without type 2 diabetes (Look AHEAD Adipose Ancillary Study); ii)Pima Indianswith and without obesity; and iii) healthy, non-obese individuals (ADAPT Study). In general, increased subcutaneous fatadpexpression was associated with lower adiposity. In addition, in type 2 diabetic individuals increasedadpexpression was also related with higher insulin sensitivity and RQ. However, such relationship betweenadpexpression and obesity (% body fat) or insulin sensitivity (fasting insulin) was not replicated in healthier and leaner subject (ADAPT study) probably due to narrower ranges of body fat and insulin sensitivity. These results were consistent with previous reports in genetically modified 3T3-L1 fat cells, fruit flies and mice. In all these models, increasedadpexpression was related with decreased lipid accumulation and enhanced metabolic control (5). At a molecular level, theadp-related metabolic phenotype appears to be explained by the inhibitory action ofadpon PPAR-gamma2 activity (5). Such findings are partially in line with a previous obese PPAR-gamma2-knock-out mouse model (2). PPAR-gamma2-/-mice are characterized by impaired adipogenic capacity (consistent with transgenicadpmice), but with increased ectopic lipotoxicity and impaired metabolic control (2) (different from transgenicadpmice) (5). Since transgenicadpmice are lean, one can speculate that a decreased lipogenic capacity may not be critical for energy homeostasis and does not lead to the metabolic disturbances observed in obese PPAR-gamma2-/-mice. Therefore, it would be insightful to compare metabolic control in obese animals with and without overexpression ofadpgene. In the present study, we did not measure adipose tissue PPAR-gamma2 expression/activity and/or adipose tissue lipogenic capacity, so we cannot provide a mechanistic explanation for our findings. Due to the cross-sectional nature of our study, we cannot establish a causal relationship for our findings, i.e., one can also argue that adipose tissueadpexpression may well be driven by fat mass or insulin sensitivity. In conclusion and similar to previous findings in insects and mice (5), our results suggest that adipose tissue expression ofadpmight play a role in human obesity and energy metabolism. Future studies should explore which nutritional/hormonal factors could regulate adipose tissueadpexpression.