The management of advanced colorectal cancer has improved significantly over recent years. Targeted or biological agents provide additional benefit to standard chemotherapy. The most important targets for biological agents in metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC) are the epithelial growth factor receptor (EGFR) and the vascular endothelial growth factor-A (VEGF-A). With targeted agents there was hope that better patient selection would follow and this has been the case for anti-EGFR therapy, but it remains elusive for therapy targeting VEGF. TheKRASgene exon 2 mutation is predictive of nonresponse to EGFR-targeted monoclonal antibody (MAb) therapy across all treatment lines, either as a single agent or in combination with irinotecan- or oxaliplatin-based chemotherapy (AmadoNone, 2008;KarapetisNone, 2008;BokemeyerNone, 2011;Van CutsemNone, 2011). More recent evidence assessing the impact of additionalRASmutations (KRASexons 3 and 4 andNRASexons 1-4) has further defined the group of patients who do not respond to anti-EGFR agent. DouillardNone(2013) andPeetersNone(2014) have reported that additionalRASmutations occur in 17-18% of patients previously classified asKRASWT and that this group also do not respond to anti-EGFR therapy. Importantly, the recently published results from the PEAK trial reported extraRASmutations in 23% ofKRASexon 2 WT patients, highlighting the potential for significant clinical impact (SchwartzbergNone, 2014). Determination of extendedRASstatus is therefore now recommended in advanced CRC patients being considered for anti-EGFR-targeted therapy and current evidence suggests that patients with a mutatedRASshould not receive such therapy. Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinases (PI3K) are a family of three lipid kinases. Class 1A molecules are heterodimers of regulatory (p85) and catalytic (p110) subunits and in CRC the p110alphaisoform is encoded byPIK3CAand is mutated in 15-18% of patients (De RoockNone, 2011;KarapetisNone, 2014). More than 80% of these mutations occur in exon 9 or 20, with exon 9 and exon 20 making up 60-65% and 20-25%, respectively. PIK3CAmutations can co-occur withRASmutations. Mutations ofPIK3CAare thought to be potentially predictive of anti-EGFR effect, although prediction of cetuximab activity is thought to be primarily associated with exon 20 mutations (Sartore-BianchiNone, 2009;De RoockNone, 2010). The low frequency of exon 20 mutations (3-5% in total) however makes assessment of these results difficult to interpret and the impact ofPIK3CAmutations on prognosis is still uncertain (DayNone, 2013;KarapetisNone, 2014). More importantly, the question of whetherPIK3CAmay have some role in tumour angiogenesis and therefore anti-VEGF therapy has been postulated. In this setting, a difference based on type of mutation is also unclear (Jiang and Liu, 2009). Bevacizumab (anti-VEGF MAb) in combination with chemotherapy (single agent or combination) is an accepted standard of care for advanced colorectal cancer (HurwitzNone, 2005;SaltzNone, 2008;TebbuttNone, 2010). Unlike EGFR MAbs, there remains no reliable and reproducible predictive marker to assist in patient selection. In solid tumours, VEGF and EGFR pathways have been shown to interact effecting an increase in angiogenesis (Ellis, 2004;CiardielloNone, 2006), although we have previously reported results from the MAX trial that failed to indicate any relationship between outcomes of anti-VEGF therapy andKRASexon 2 andBRAFmutation status (PriceNone, 2011). These results confirmed a previous but smaller retrospective analysis (InceNone, 2005). Both of these analyses were based onKRASexon 2 mutation status alone. With additionalRASmutation rates as high as 23%, there has been renewed interest in the potential interaction between the EGFR and VEGF pathway. This analysis was performed to explore the rate of additionalRASmutations in a first-line population randomised within a trial focussing on anti-VEGF therapy and to further assess whether a change to an extendedRASmutation population has any impact on the predictive and prognostic outcomes of extendedRASMTvsWT. In addition, we undertook an analysis ofPIK3CAmutation status (exons 9 and 20 combined), exploring any interaction with progression-free survival (PFS), overall survival (OS) and response rate (RR) in patients receiving anti-VEGF therapy with bevacizumab when combined with capecitabine in the randomised phase III MAX study. The MAX study design and eligibility criteria have been reported previously (TebbuttNone, 2010). The primary objective of this phase III study was to evaluate the effect of adding bevacizumab with or without mitomycin to capecitabine on PFS among patients receiving first-line chemotherapy for their mCRC. Enrollment of patients in the original trial occurred between July 2005 and June 2007. Patients were randomly assigned to receive capecitabine (C); capecitabine and bevacizumab (CB); and capecitabine, bevacizumab and mitomycin C (CBM). All patients who participated in the MAX translational studies provided written informed consent at the time of study enrolment. Ethics approval for translational studies was obtained centrally. Tissue consent and collection was performed at the time of trial commencement before this planned biomarker analysis. Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded samples of tumour tissue from archival specimens collected at the time of cancer diagnosis were retrieved from storage at hospital pathology departments. A histopathologist reviewed cases and if deemed to have less than 50% malignant crypts in the section, the tissue was macrodissected to ensure a high proportion (90%) of tumour cells. Assays of tissue samples forKRAS(exons 2, 3 and 4),NRAS(exons 2, 3 and 4) andPIK3CA(exons 9 and 20) mutations were performed by investigators who were blinded to patient outcomes. Patients were classified as mutated (MT) if a mutation was detected in any of the exons examined, or wild-type (WT) in the absence of any mutation, forRASandPIK3CA, respectively. Mutation analysis ofRASandPIK3CAgenes was performed using genomic DNA extracted from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue sections (QIAamp DNA FFPE Tissue Kit, Qiagen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) and pyrosequencing performed by the Perth node of the Australian Genome Research Facility (AGRF) using the PyroMark Q24 Pyrosequencing system (Qiagen). The sensitivity for this platform is 2% mutant to WT alleles; a cutoff of 10% was used to call mutations based on prior recommendations for pyrosequencing. Full details are described inSupplementary Fileonline. Variant sequences were confirmed by Sanger sequencing using both forward and reverse primers (AGRF). All randomly assigned patients for whom data onKRAS,NRASandPI3Kmutation status were available were included in this analysis. PFS, the primary end point, was defined as the time from randomisation until documented evidence of disease progression according to the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumours (RECIST) version 1.0, the occurrence of new disease or death from any cause. The secondary end points were OS, defined as the time from randomisation until death from any cause, and RR, defined according to RECIST version 1.0. The PFS and OS of patients in eachRASgroup (MTvsWT) and treatment groups (CvsCB and CBM) were summarised using Kaplan-Meier curves, and the difference between these groups was compared using log-rank test, with the hazard ratio (HR) and its 95% confidence interval (CI) calculated from a Cox regression model with a single covariate. A Cox regression model with treatment covariate (CvsCB and CBM),RASstatus and their interaction was used to assess whetherRASwas predictive of bevacizumab treatment efficacy. If no significant treatment interaction was detected, multivariate proportional hazards regression model was fitted to data for all patients, withRASstatus and other protocol prespecified baseline covariates in the model to assess whetherRASwas an independent prognostic factor. We calculated the odds ratio (OR) and its 95% CI using univariate and multivariate logistic regression models to compute the difference in RR for theRASgroup. A logistic regression model with treatment covariate,RASstatus and their interaction was used to assess whetherRASwas predictive of an effect of bevacizumab on RR. The same methodologies were adopted in assessing the predictive and prognostic values ofPIK3CA. We also compared baseline characteristics of patients with and without tumour samples available for mutational analysis. Multivariate logistic regression model was also performed to identify predictors (if any) of tumour samples available for mutational analysis. All reportedP-values were two sided and were not adjusted for multiple testing. Of the 471 patients who underwent randomisation, a total of 280 tumour specimens (n=95 from the C group,n=99 from the CB group andn=86 from the CBM group) were available and examined forRAS, accounting for 59.4% of the total study population (Figure 1). The median follow-up time of these patients was 30.2 months (range 0.4 to 42.4). Tumour specimens from the remaining patients could not be retrieved, were not suitable for mutational analysis or had insufficient DNA for mutational analysis to be performed for bothKRASandNRAS. The characteristics of patients with and without tissue sample available for mutational analysis were similar aside from a higher rate of primary resection and lower rate of residual local disease in the tissue available group (Supplementary Table 1online), reflecting the amount of tissue available that will be greater in a resected primary specimen when compared with a colonoscopic or metastasis biopsy. In multivariate logistic regression of baseline characteristics, prior resection of primary tumour (OR 6.98,P less than 0.001) and no prior radiotherapy (OR 0.47,P less than 0.01) were associated with having tumour specimens available for mutational analysis. A total of 276 tumour specimens (n=89 from the C group,n=97 from the CB group andn=90 from the CBM group) were examined forPIK3CAmutation status, accounting for 58.6% of the total study population. The baseline characteristics were balanced between treatment groups in the tissue subpopulation (Supplementary Table 1). TheRASmutation was detected in 108 (38.9%) patients. Mutation was detected inKRASexon 2 (n=89),KRASexon 3 (n=8),KRASexon 4 (n=5),NRASexon 2 (n=4),NRASexon 3 (n=2) but none forNRASexon 4. One patient had mutation in bothKRASexons 2 and 4. A total of 19 patients who wereKRASexon 2 WT had otherRASmutations (10%). PIK3CAmutation was rare and detected in only 30 patients (10.8% exon 9,n=20; exon 20,n=9; exons 9 and 20,n=1). Among the 262 patients with tumour specimens tested and results available forKRAS,NRASandPIK3CAmutation status, 13 (5.0%) patients had bothRASandPIK3CAmutations, 16 (6.1%)RASWT patients hadPIK3CAmutation and 80 (30.5%)PIK3CAWT patients hadRASmutation. Baseline characteristics by mutation status are summarised inTable 1. Clinical outcomes were comparable with no significant difference in primary or secondary clinical outcomes between the total study population and the patients who were evaluated forRASmutations (Tables 2and3). Among patients withRASMT tumour, the median PFS was 6.2 months in the group receiving C and 8.8 months in the groups receiving CB or CBM. The HR for disease progression was 0.56 (95% CI, 0.37-0.86;P=0.007;Figure 2). Among patients withRASWT tumour, the median PFS was 6.0 months in the group receiving C and 8.6 months in the groups receiving CB or CBM (HR 0.69; 95% CI, 0.49-0.97;P=0.03;Figure 2). The additional benefit of bevacizumab on PFS was not significantly greater among the patients withRASWT tumours than among those withRASMT tumours (P=0.54 for the interaction betweenRASstatus and the assigned treatment). For patients withPIK3CAMT tumours, the median PFS was 9.9 months in the group receiving C and 8.5 months in the groups receiving CB or CBM (HR, 1.48; 95% CI, 0.61-3.58;P=0.38;Figure 2). Among patients withPIK3CAWT tumours, the median PFS was 5.9 months in the group receiving C and 8.4 months in the groups receiving CB or CBM (HR, 0.58; 95% CI, 0.44-0.77;P less than 0.001;Figure 2). The additional benefit of bevacizumab on PFS appears greater among the patients withPIK3CAWT tumours than among those withPIK3CAMT tumours but does not reach statistical significance (P=0.06 for the interaction betweenPIK3CAstatus and the assigned treatment). Among patients withRASMT tumours, there was no statistical difference in OS, and the median OS was 22.8 months in the group receiving C and 20.4 months in the groups receiving CB or CBM (HR, 0.91; 95% CI, 0.58-1.44;P=0.70). Among patients withRASWT tumours, the median OS was 20.6 months in the group receiving C and 18.9 months in the groups receiving CB or CBM (HR, 0.99; 95% CI, 0.67-1.45;P=0.95). The effect of the addition of bevacizumab on OS was not significantly greater among the patients withRASWT tumours than among those withRASMT tumours (P=0.73 for the interaction betweenRASstatus and the assigned treatment). Among patients withPIK3CAMT tumours, the median OS was 18.9 months in the group receiving C and 19.2 months in the groups receiving CB or CBM (HR, 1.18; 95% CI, 0.46-3.06;P=0.73). Among patients withPIK3CAWT tumours, the median OS was 20.6 months in the group receiving C and 19.8 months in the groups receiving CB or CBM (HR, 0.89; 95% CI, 0.65-1.22;P=0.47). The effect of the addition of bevacizumab on OS was not significantly greater among the patients withPIK3CAWT tumours than among those withPIK3CAMT tumours (P=0.49 for the interaction betweenPIK3CAstatus and the assigned treatment). The response rate based onRASandPIK3CAmutation status is summarised inTable 4andSupplementary Table 2online. Patients withRASWT tumour appeared to have a borderline greater likelihood of response with the addition of bevacizumab (P=0.04 for the interaction betweenRASstatus and the assigned treatment). The effect of the addition of bevacizumab on response was similar among the patients withPIK3CAWT tumours compared with those withPIK3CAMT tumours (P=0.26 for the interaction betweenPIK3CAstatus and the assigned treatment). There was no significant difference in PFS between patients withRASMT tumours and those withRASWT tumours. The median PFS was 7.7 months among the patients withRASMT tumours as compared with 7.6 months among those withRASWT tumours (HR (RASWTvsMT), 0.92; 95% CI, 0.71-1.17;P=0.49). Similarly,RAShas no prognostic impact on OS (Figure 3A), with median OS of 20.4 months forRASMT tumours compared with 19.7 months forRASWT tumours (HR (RASWTvsMT), 0.94; 95% CI, 0.71-1.24;P=0.65). Multivariate analysis did not change these results significantly (results not shown). There was also no significant difference in PFS and OS between patients withPIK3CAMT tumours and those withPIK3CAWT tumours. The median PFS was 8.8 months among the patients withPIK3CAMT tumours as compared with 7.5 months among those withPIK3CAWT tumours (HR (PIK3CAWTvsMT), 0.90; 95% CI, 0.60-1.35;P=0.61). The median OS was 19.2 months among patients withPIK3CAMT tumours as compared with 20.4 months among those withPIK3CAWT tumours (HR (PIK3CAWTvsMT), 1.06; 95% CI, 0.68-1.66;P=0.77;Figure 3B). Multivariate analysis did not change these results significantly (results not shown). As there was higher rate of primary resection and lower rate of residual local disease in the patients who were evaluated forRASandPIK3CAmutations as compared with those without tissue, we perform sensitivity analysis by adjusting for these baseline factors. With adjustment,RASremained nonpredictive of benefit for bevacizumab (PFS:P=0.62, OS:P=0.95 for the interaction betweenRASstatus and the assigned treatment). PIK3CAalso remained nonpredictive of benefit for bevacizumab (PFS:P=0.06, OS:P=0.47 for the interaction betweenPIK3CAstatus and the assigned treatment). We have previously shown thatKRASexon 2 mutation status is not predictive of bevacizumab effect despite the proposed cross-talk between the EGFR and VEGF signalling pathways (Ellis, 2004). Given the recently reported data on the frequency and relevance of additionalRASmutations on prediction for anti-EGFR therapy, we aimed to assess the mutation rate in the MAX trial as an extension of our prior analysis (PriceNone, 2011). In our population we now show that 1 in 10 patients (10%) consideredKRASWT have an additionalRASmutation. Despite these additional mutations, there was still no predictive effect on the outcome of bevacizumab, andRASmutation status remained nonprognostic. The MAX trial reported improved PFS with the addition of bevacizumab to capecitabine when compared with capecitabine alone. The potential impact ofKRASmutation status on outcomes with bevacizumab had been questioned and this led to a number of investigators to undertake retrospective analysis of bevacizumab trials, our group being one of them. The finding that up to 23% ofKRASexon 2 WT patients may have additionalRASmutation led us to re-analyse our data set with extendedRASresults. Of the patients, 59% had available tissue forRASassessment. Outcomes for PFS and OS were consistent between the intention-to-treat (ITT) and tissue population (Tables 2and3). Consistent with the primary analysis, PFS was improved by a similar magnitude and there was no apparent impact of the extendedRASstatus (HR, 0.56RASMT and 0.69RASWT,Pfor interaction betweenRASstatus and assigned treatment=0.54). These data for extendedRASare consistent with the retrospective analyses of the MAX and the pivotal Hurwitz study (IFL+/-bevacizumab) for exon 2KRASMT (InceNone, 2005;HurwitzNone, 2009). In contrast to the study ofHurwitzNone(2009) where only 31.3% of patient's tissue was assessable, our data set has 60% of the ITT population available for analysis and thus we are able to confirm that changes inRASMT rates has not altered our prior conclusions. We detected extendedRASmutations in 39% of the patient group with available tissue. Importantly, 10% of patients previously labelledKRAS(exon 2) WT harboured an additionalRASmutation. The proportion of exon 2 WT patients with an additionalRASmutation is less than reported in the published series with panitumumab and cetuximab (PRIME 17%, FIRE-3 16% and PEAK 23%) (DouillardNone, 2013;HeinemannNone, 2014;SchwartzbergNone, 2014). Subsequently, investigators from the CRYSTAL and OPUS studies have reported in abstract form additionalRASMT rates of 15% and 26%, respectively (BokemeyerNone, 2014;CiardielloNone, 2014). The difference may be explained partly as the MAX trial represented an older population considered suitable for bevacizumab and single-agent fluorouracil. Although there is no definite evidence thatKRASexon 2 MT rate may differ with age, additional mutations may vary andRussoNone(2014) recently reported different rates ofNRASMT based on age. Thus, subtle differences in these patient populations and patient characteristics may explain the lower rate of additionalRASmutations seen here. It is also likely that the method chosen to detect mutations will have differing sensitivity and recommended cutoff percentages, resulting in variation in reported rates of mutation (WhitehallNone, 2009;PintoNone, 2011). Here, for example, we used pyrosequencing that differs with the method used by the PRIME and PEAK investigators who chose bidirectional sanger sequencing and WAVE-based surveyor kits. The investigators from the CRYSTAL and OPUS studies used the BEAMing technique. Although this is one of the most sensitive techniques reported, a 5% sensitivity cutoff was chosen for these analyses to be consistent with other literature. Variation between the technique chosen is further highlighted by theNRASexon 4 results that appear only detectable when using BEAMing. Only the FIRE-3 investigators used pyrosequencing and their extendedRASMT rate was one of the lowest reported. Ultimately, differences in patient populations within trials and the sensitivity of the methods used will lead to a range ofRASmutations rates. The exact frequency will become clearer as additional studies are analysed and this will help define the optimal technique and sensitivity cutoff for clinical practice. The PI3K signalling is considered to regulate tumour growth and angiogenesis by activating AKT and other targets, as well as inducing VEGF and HIF-1 expression (Jiang and Liu, 2009;ZhangNone, 2012). Furthermore,SolerNone(2013) have reported in a mouse model that inactivation ofPIK3CAleads to increased vascular density, reduced vessel size and altered pericyte coverage, and thusPIK3CAhas a role in regulation of vessel formation. As there is evidence for a potential interaction ofPIK3CAand angiogenesis, and importantly as a biomarker for guiding antiangiogenic therapy remains elusive, we decided to explore whether there was any signal for an association betweenPIK3CAmutation status and outcome. In the MAX patientsPIK3CAmutation was seen in 11.1% of patients (7.5% exon 9 and 3.6% exon 20). We chose to combinePIK3CAMT (exons 9 and 20) for this analysis. In contrast to prior studies assessing MT status and activity of anti-EGFR therapy (De RoockNone, 2010,2011) where only exon 20 is relevant for predicting outcome, there is no suggestion of a similar relationship with a specific mutation when considering a potential interaction with the VEGF pathway (ZhangNone, 2012). Furthermore, the small numbers of eachPIK3CAexon MT would make results difficult to interpret. Despite theoretical relationships betweenPIK3CAand angiogenesis and VEGF activation, we found no predictive effect. The borderline trend to a reduced effect of bevacizumab in thePIK3CAMT patients is likely because of small numbers, although ultimately larger data sets or prospective analysis will be required to asses whether this outcome is real. Furthermore, differences in response rate are also likely to be a random phenomenon based on the small sample size. That said, and although not directly comparable, patients withPIK3CAMT treated with the combination of bevacizumab, temsirolimus and liposomal doxorubicin had the opposite outcome with improved response rates when compared with those with WTPIK3CA, potentially supporting some interaction of VEGF pathway (MoroneyNone, 2012), and further analysis of larger data sets may therefore be appropriate. Finally, in keeping with a number of publications, we found no indication thatPIK3CAMT was prognostic. When considering whether investigators should assessPIK3CAbased on individual exon or combined, evidence fromLiaoNone(2012) recently found that neither exon 9 nor 20 was prognostic when assessed independently, supporting a combined analysis particularly given the small numbers. It is important to comment on the potential limitations of a subset analysis. This study is restricted to 59.4% of the tissue that was available for mutation analysis and hence not necessarily generalisable to the broader population. However, the results of our study still demonstrate good internal validity. There is no strong evidence to support that eitherRASorPIK3CAis a predictive factor for bevacizumab benefit. The available tissue was obtained at the time of study enrolment and notpost hocafter the primary trial result became available. Although there is an in balance between the tissue population and ITT population in terms of primaryin situ, this is balanced in each analysis. Thus, although this may be prognostic, the outcomes for bevacizumab benefit are unaltered. Although there might be differences in patients' baseline characteristics between those with and without tissue (Supplementary Table 1), such differences might exist for patients not enrolled in the MAX trial. Furthermore, sensitivity analysis performed to adjust for these different baseline characteristics does not change the overall conclusion of this study. In conclusion, our analysis of extendedRASandPIK3CAmutation status from the MAX trial tissue population did not find any therapeutic relevance of mutation status of eitherRASorPIK3CAwhen bevacizumab is given in combination with capecitabine chemotherapy. TheRASandPIK3CAstatus was not prognostic for metastatic CRC for PFS or OS. Finally, we confirm that a clinically relevant proportion of patients (10%) consideredKRASexon 2 WT have an additional mutation in theRASpathway.