Eukaryotic translation initiation usually follows a cap-dependent (CD) mechanism where the 43S ribosomal pre-initiation complex is recruited to a 7-methylguanosine cap located at the 5' end of the mRNA strand via recognition of the cap-binding complex eIF4FNone,None. While progress over the years has provided a detailed structural and mechanistic understanding of each step in the CD processNone,None, very little is known about the molecular basis of cap-independent (CI) translation initiationNone. CI translation occurs during normal cellular processes (e.g., mitosis and apoptosis) or when the CD translation machinery is compromised by viral infection or diseaseNone,None. To address this critical gap in our understanding of protein translation, we developed anin vitroselection strategy to identify sequences in the human genome that mediate CI translation initiation. Our selection strategy relies on mRNA display, which is a cell-free method for covalently linking newly translated proteins to their encoding RNA messageNone. In this approach (Fig. 1a), a genomic library is inserted into the 5' untranslated region (UTR) of a DNA construct containing the genetic information necessary for mRNA display. The library isin vitrotranscribed into a pool of uncapped single-stranded mRNA that is photo-ligated at the 3' end to a DNA linker containing a 3' puromycin residue. When translatedin vitro, RNA sequences that mediate CI translation initiation become covalently linked to a peptide affinity tag encoded in the open reading frame. Chemical bond formation between newly translated peptides and their encoding mRNA occurs via the natural peptidyl transferase activity of the ribosome, which recognizes puromycin as a tyrosyl-tRNA analogue (Fig. 1b). Functional RNAs are then isolated, reverse-transcribed, and amplified by PCR to regenerate the pool of DNA for another selection cycle. We began the selection with a library of ~1013RNA-DNA-puromycin molecules containing a random region of genomic fragments (~150 nts) that were derived from total human DNANone. The library was translated for 1 hour at 30 degrees C and fusion formation was promoted by incubating the translation mixture overnight at -20 degrees C under high salt conditions. mRNA-peptide fusions were isolated from the crude lysate by oligo(dT) affinity purification, reverse-transcribed, and sequences displaying a His-6 affinity tag were immobilized on Ni-NTA agarose beads. The beads were thoroughly washed to remove RNA molecules that did not form mRNA-peptide fusions or did not translate in the correct reading frame. mRNA-peptide fusions that remained bound were selectively eluted with imidazole, exchanged into buffer, and amplified by PCR to reinitiate another selection cycle. The abundance of mRNA-peptide fusions plateaued after six rounds of mRNA display, indicating that the library had become dominated by sequences that could enhance CI translation initiation (Fig. 1c). To assess the level of sequence diversity that remained in the pool, we cloned and sequenced members from the selection output. A total of 636 unique sequences were identified, 225 of which showed 100% identity to the human reference genome (hg18) (Supplementary Table 1). The remaining 411 sequences have high homology (85-99% identity), but contain small degrees of sequence variation that include single nucleotide polymorphisms in addition to small insertions and deletions (Supplementary Table 2). This level of variation is expected for individuals in a population, and it is known that functionally relevant sequences can differ between individual genomesNone,None. To test our selected sequences for functional activity in human cells, we constructed two luciferase reporter vectors (Fig. 2a)None. The first vector contained an unstructured 5' UTR designed to quantify the activity of the translation enhancing elements (TEEs). The second vector contained a stable stem-loop structure (DeltaG = -58 kcal/mol) upstream of the insert, which blocks translation in the absence of an internal ribosomal entry site (IRES). Translation of both mRNA templates containing a no-insert 13-nt control sequence confirmed that the stem-loop structure inhibits translation (~99% inhibition)in vitroand in cells (Fig. 2b). Quantitative realtime PCR (qRT-PCR) confirmed that the translational differences were not caused by differences in RNA expression. Because cryptic splicing activity is a common cause of IRES misinterpretationNone, we used a cytoplasmic expression system that bypasses nuclear expressionNone. In this system, mammalian cells transfected with an expression vector carrying a vaccinia virus (VACV)-specific promoter are immediately infected with VACV. The virus produces its own RNA polymerase that recognizes the viral promoter and mediates RNA expression in the cytoplasm. We confirmed that nuclear expression did not contribute to translation by measuring the luciferase activity of transfected cells that were not infected with VACV. These cells yielded luciferase values equivalent to untreated control cells (data not shown). Next, we tested the set of perfectly matched sequences for TEE and IRES function in human cells. Using the unstructured vector, we found that the selected sequences produce up to 100-fold more luciferase than the no insert control (Fig. 2c), demonstrating that ourin vitroselection strategy successfully enriched for sequences that enhance translation. Approximately 20% of our TEEs remain functional when tested in the 5' hairpin construct (Fig. 2c), suggesting that a large number of TEEs are capable of internal ribosomal initiation. To ensure that the observed IRES activity was not due to a cryptic promoterNone, we screened 20 high activity sequences in HeLa cells using a stem-loop vector lacking the VACV promoter. This assay identified 8 sequences with modest to high cryptic promoter activity (Supplementary Fig. 1). We labeled the remaining 12 sequences human IRESs, as they do not exhibit cryptic promoter activity and are not an artifact of RNA splicing. We then compared the set of 12 human IRESs to a set of 12 randomly chosen sequences from the starting library in the structured and unstructured luciferase reporter systems, both in HeLa cells and in HeLa cell lysate. Strong concordance was observed for the unstructured luciferase reporter vector, which showed ~100-fold greater translation enhancing activity in HeLa cells and in HeLa cell lysate as compared to the set of unselected sequences (Fig. 2d,Supplementary Table 3). A similar trend was observed for the 5' hairpin reporter, which showed that the selected sequences exhibit up to ~400-fold higher activity in cells and up to ~100-fold higher activityin vitrothan the unselected sequences (Fig. 2d,Supplementary Table 3). Collectively, these results establish the ability of ourin vitroselection strategy to identify RNA sequences from the human genome that function as efficient translation enhancing elements, a subset of which function as IRESs. One caveat of our HeLa cell assay is that the mRNA transcripts likely contain a 5' cap due to the strong capping enzymes encoded in the VACV genomeNone. This is not a concern for the hairpin construct as the stem-loop structure was shown to block CD translation initiation (Fig. 2b). However, in the case of the unstructured templates, where a 5' cap could aid translation initiation, further experiments are needed to define the activity of the TEE. We therefore selected 26 sequences that exhibited a range of TEE activity, but had no observable IRES activity (Fig. 2c). We then measured their luciferase activity under CI conditions relative to the no insert control. Consistent with the functional constraints of ourin vitroselection, the selected TEEs maintain their activity in the absence of a 5' cap (Supplementary Fig. 2). In some cases, activity increased significantly when the 5' cap was missing, suggesting that certain TEEs prefer CI translation initiation pathways. This observation provides new insight into the mechanism of translation initiation where the 5'-cap is thought to inhibit alternative pathwaysNone. Since only a small number of human TEEs are knownNone, we decided to perform Illumina deep sequencing on the starting library (R0) and the selection output (R6). Sequence analysis revealed that only 2% of theR0sequences remain in the pool after six rounds of selection. We aligned the sequences to the reference human genome (hg19) and identified 12,278 unique regions that were enriched by at least 10-fold (see Methods,Supplementary Fig. 3,Supplementary Table 4). Thein vitroselected TEE-bearing regions (TBRs) map to ~2 million base pairs (Mb). A vast majority of TBRs were shorter than 250 bps (99.5%) and widely dispersed across all 24 chromosomes (Fig. 3a,Supplementary Fig. 4). Of these, 12% (1,532) mapped to genomic regions containing known genes, even though genic regions (introns and exons) account for ~40% of the human genome (Fig. 3b)None. This under-abundance in genic regions may be a result of negative selection against TEEs aimed at avoiding disruptive translation in nature, which would be consistent with our results of TEE activityin vitroand in cells (Fig. 2). Moreover, the TBRs are preferentially found in the 5'-UTR regions of genes (3-fold over-representation), which would suggest potential functional roles for these elements. We also observed a small, but statistically significant, enrichment of TBRs in long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) regions as compared to the entire human genome (12.2% vs. 11.5%, binomial test,P=0.003), which could lead to the production of novel proteins since these sites are located in intragenic regions of the genome. GeneOntology analysis revealed that many TBRs associate with genes involved in signal transduction, cell communication, and neurological system development pathways (Supplementary Fig. 5). These functional categories are frequently reported for genes that have undergone adaptive evolutionNone,None. One such example are genes encoding glutamate receptors, which are important for neural communication, memory formation, learning, and regulationNone. Among the 21 human genes encoding glutamate receptors, 8 harbor TBRs in their introns. Of these, two were enriched by more than 1000-fold afterin vitroselection using mRNA display. Some of these sequences are flanked by regions that are highly conserved among species and show transcriptional activity in cells (Fig. 3c), indicating a possible role for TBRs in the translation of proteins involved in important developmental pathways. In summary, we present anin vitroselection strategy that makes it possible to search entire genomes for RNA sequences that enhance cap-independent translation initiation. Using this technique, we identified greater than 12,000 TEEs in the human genome, generated a high-resolution map of human TEE bearing regions, and validated the function of a subset of sequencesin vitroand in cells. Our approach is time and cost effective, cell-line independent, and scalable, making it an effective tool for studying translation mechanisms in other genomes. The pool of fragmented human genomic DNA was previously constructed with conserved sequences flanking the random regionNone. The library was modified by overlap PCR to add all necessary sequence information required for mRNA display. This included a T7 RNA polymerase promoter site upstream of the random region and an open reading frame and photo-crosslinking site downstream of the random region. The open reading frame included a canonical AUG start site followed by a nucleotide sequence encoding a flexible linker and His-6 protein affinity tag. The library was amplified using the forward primer (5' TTCTAATACGACTCACTATAGGGGGATCCAAGCTTCAGACGTGCCTCACTACG) and reverse primer (5' ATAGCCGGTGTCCACTTCCATGATGATGGTGATGGTGGGCCATG GCTGAGCTTGACGCTTTGC). For each round of selection, 120 pmol of the dsDNA library was transcribed with T7 RNA polymerase into single-stranded RNA and purified by 10% denaturing urea-PAGE gel. Purified RNA was photo-ligated to a psoralen-DNA-puromycin linker (5'-psoralen-TAGCCGGTG-(PEG9)2-A15-ACC-puromycin) by irradiating at 366 nm for 15 minutes. The RNA-DNA-puromycin product was ethanol precipitated and the cross-linked RNA (400 pmol) was translatedin vitroby incubating the library with micrococcal nuclease-treated rabbit reticulocyte lysate and35S-methionine for 1 hour at 30 degrees C. The mixture was then incubated overnight at -20 degrees C in the presence of KCl (600 mM) and MgCl2(75 mM) to promote fusion formation. The mRNA-peptide fusion molecules were purified from the crude lysate using oligo (dT)-cellulose beads (NEB) and reverse transcribed with SuperScriptII (Invitrogen) by extending the DNA primer (5' TTTTTTTTTTTTTTTATCC ACTTCCATGATGATGGT) with dNTPs. Fusion molecules containing the correctly translated His-6 tag were isolated on Ni-NTA agarose beads (Qiagen). Functional sequences were recovered by eluting the column with 500 mM imidazole, dialyzing the sample into water, and amplifying the cDNA by PCR using previously described overlap PCR primers to add back the necessary sequences for mRNA display. The selection progress was monitored by measuring the fraction of S35-labeled mRNA-peptide fusions that bound to and eluted from the oligo (dT) and Ni-NTA affinity columns. After 6 rounds of selection and amplification, the dsDNA library was cloned into a pJET plasmid (Fermentas), and individual isolates were sequenced at the ASU core DNA sequencing facility. A monocistronic luciferase reporter vector with an unstructured 5' UTR, that contains both a T7 RNA polymerase promoter and a vaccinia virus synthetic late promoter (slp), was constructed from a pT3_R-luc IRES F-luc(pA)62luciferase reporter plasmidNone. The vector was first modified using PCR to exchange the T3 promoter with a T7 promoter (forward primer 5' GATCCCGGGATTAATAACGACTCACTATAGGGAACAAAAGCTGGGTACCGG and reverse primer 5' GATCCCGGGTGCGCGCTTGGCGTAATCATGG). The resulting PCR product was cut withSmaI restriction endonuclease, and recircularized using T4 DNA ligase. A synthetic double-stranded DNA molecule containing the slp promoter was inserted immediately downstream of the T7 promoter usingKpnI andXhoI restriction sites. Finally, therenilla luciferasegene was removed by PCR using forward primer 5' ACTAGGATCCGCTTCTGTTGGGAAATGC and reverse primer 5' CGCGGATCCAAGCTTATCGATACCGTCGAC. The PCR product was cut withBamHI restriction endonuclease and recircularized using T4 DNA ligase. To assay for IRES activity, two additional luciferase reporter vectors were used, both of which contain a stable stem-loop structure in the 5' UTR. The first vector was the pT7-stem_F-luc(pA)62luciferase reporter plasmid described previouslyNone. This plasmid contains a T7 RNA polymerase promoter upstream of the stem-loop. The second vector was constructed by removing the stem-loop structure from pT7-stem_F-luc(pA)62usingStuI andXhoI restriction sites and reciprocally inserting it into the unstructured vector, immediately downstream of the slp promoter. Plasmids to assay for cryptic promoter activity were generated by removing the T7 and slp promoters from the unstructured vector usingSmaI andBamHI restriction sites. T4 DNA ligase was then used to insert a 22-nucleotide spacer (5' ATAGCGCCACCGAGATATCTGG 3') in place of the promoters. To insert the human genomic sequences into the luciferase reporter vectors, the genomic fragments were amplified by PCR (forward primer 5' TAGGGGGATCCCAGAC GTGCCTCACTACGT and reverse primer 5' TGGGCCATGGCTGAGCTTGACGCTTTGCT) to addBamHI andNcoI restriction sites to the 5' and 3' ends respectively. The PCR products were then reciprocally inserted into the vectors immediately upstream of the luciferase-coding region by restriction endonuclease digestion. HeLa cells, obtained from American Type Culture Collection, were maintained in DMEM (Invitrogen) supplemented with 5% fetal bovine serum (HyClone) and 5 mug/mL gentamicin (Invitrogen). Cells were kept at 37 degrees C in a humidified atmosphere containing 5% CO2. The cells were free of mycoplasma contamination, as determined by PCR during routine monitoring of cell lysates. HeLa cells were seeded at a density of 15,000 cells per well in white 96-well plates 18 hours prior to transfection. Cells were transfected with a complex of the luciferase reporter plasmid (200 ng) and Lipofectamine 2000 (0.5 mul) in Opti-MEM (Invitrogen), and immediately infected with the Copenhagen strain (VC-2) of wild-type vaccinia virus at a multiplicity of infection (m.o.i) of 5 PFU/cell. Cells were lysed (6 hours post-infection) in the 96-well plates and luciferase activity was measured using the Promega Luciferase Assay System with a Glomax microplate luminometer (Promega). Cell-free characterization of the top translation enhancing sequences was performed using a HumanIn vitroProtein Expression Kit (Pierce). Luciferase expression was achieved following manufacturer's protocols using 300 ng of linear template for a two-hour transcription at 32 degrees C followed by a 90 min translation at 30 degrees C.A portion of the cells used in the luciferase reporter transfection studies were separately lysed to evaluate the quality of the cellular RNA. RNA isolation was performed using the PerfectPure RNA cultured cell kit (5 Prime) according to manufacturer's protocol. Isolated RNA was reverse transcribed with an oligo (dT) primer and Superscript II (Invitrogen). Realtime PCR (iQTM SYBR(r) Green Supermix, Bio-Rad) was used to determine the mRNA levels of luciferase (forward primer 5' GCTGGGCGTTAATCAGAGAG and reverse primer 5' GTGTTCGTCTTCGTCCCAGT) as well as the housekeeping gene hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase (HPRT, forward primer 5' TGCTGAGGATTTGGAAAGGGTG and reverse primer 5' CCTTGAGCACACAGAGGGCTAC). Using the DeltaDeltaCt method, the amount of luciferase mRNA was normalized to HPRT mRNA levels. Luminescence values were then adjusted according to the normalized luciferase mRNA levels. An in-house pipeline was used to process Illumina HiSeq sequences. First, base-calling and quality control were performed using the Illumina HiSeq2000 according to the manufacturer's instructions (Supplementary Table 4a). The average length of reads was 80 base pairs. To detect and trim the PCR primers at both ends of each Illumina read, we used the "cutadapt" program (http://code.google.com/p/cutadapt/) allowing a maximum of 2 mismatches. Both primers were detected in a vast majority of the reads (85% inR0and 98% inR6). However, multiple primers were found to be concatenated in some reads, which is common for HiSeq data. For these reads, we used "cutadapt" iteratively until all primer sequences were trimmed. Finally, reads shorter than 35 bps or longer than 75 bps were discarded, because they contained too many or no copies of the primers (Supplementary Table 4b). To ensure correct orientation for all reads, sequences were reverse complemented if the 5' primer was present at the 3' end or the 3' primer was present at the 5' end. All trimmed reads were aligned to the human reference genome build 19 (hg19) using iterative execution of "bowtie" alignment and end trimmingsNone. Sequentially, with one base at a time, 16 bps from the 3' end, 5 bps from the 5' end, and another 15 bps from the 3' end were trimmed from unaligned reads, which is done to ensure low-quality base calls do not interfere with sequence alignment. In all iterations, "bowtie" was executed in "-n" mode with "-n 2 -e 70" setting. Reads uniquely mapped to exactly one location, 2 - 10 locations, and more than 10 locations in the hg19 genome were denoted as "single-copy", "low-copy" and "high-copy" reads, respectively (Supplementary Table 4c). Based on reads mapped to the human genome, we used the command-line version of the CisGenomeNoneto call peaks whereR6served as the positive sample andR0served as the negative control sample; parameters were set as "-c 1 -m 10 -w 60 -s 20 -p 0.009948 -br 0 -ssf 0". Because TEEs are directional, we applied single-strand filtering and labeled a peak as "forward" or "reverse" depending on which strand of the genome it resided on. To further reduce spurious peaks, we required a peak to have a strand-specific global false discovery rate less than 10%, total number of reads greater than 10 and at least 1 read present in theR0library (Supplementary Table 4d). The CisGenome program compared the normalized number ofR6reads with the normalized number ofR0reads in a peak, which represented the fold enrichment level (Supplementary Table 4e). Because repetitive elements can complicate downstream analysis, we focused on peaks derived from single-copy reads. Furthermore, single-copy peaks containing low-complexity sequences were detected using RepeatMasker (www.repeatmasker.org) with parameters "-noint -species human -q". Peaks with no repeat masked and with more than 10-fold enrichment were called putative TEE-bearing regions (TBRs) (Supplementary Table 4f). Chromosomal distributions of TBRs were converted into ideograms using the Idiographica websiteNone. We performed bionomical tests for evaluating the null hypothesis that TBRs are randomly distributed in the human genome. In this case, the random probability of a base to belong to a genomic category was first estimated using the RefSeq database. This was equal to 0.43, 0.005, 0.005, and 0.57, for genes (all exons and introns), 5'-UTRs, 3'-UTRs, and inter-genic regions, respectively. We also conducted GeneOntology enrichment analyses to identify functional categories that were over-represented in the collection of genes found to harbor TBRs (Supplementary Fig. 5). We used GeneOntology classifications from the PANTHERNonewebsite and applied Bonferroni correction for multiple testing, using a cutoffp-value of 10-3. Enriched biological processes were reported (Supplementary Fig. 5). Because the naive library was generated by randomly sampling the genome, longer genes were sampled more often than shorter genes. To account for this gene length effect, we constructed a background sample from the human genome that matched the length distribution of TBR genes, and redid the GeneOntology enrichment analysis. This process was repeated ten times. The Bonferroni corrected p-values from each analysis were combined using Fisher's method. Biological processes that have significant p-values ( less than 0.01) in at least one of these ten gene-length adjusted analyses or have significant combined p-values (chi2p-value less than 0.05) were highlighted. The Illumina sequencing libraries were generated according to Illumina DNA Sample Kit Instructions (Illumina Part # 0801- 0303). The protocol was modified such that enzymes were obtained from other suppliers, as previously describedNone. Briefly, DNA from the output of round 6 was end-repaired and phosphorylated using the `End-It' kit (Epicentre). The blunt, phosphorylated ends were treated with Klenow fragment (3' to 5' exo minus; NEB) and dATP to yield a 3' A overhang for ligation of Illumina's adapters. Following adapter ligation (LigaFast, Promega) DNA was PCR amplified with Illumina genomic DNA primers 1.1 and 2.1. The final libraries were band-isolated (150-300 bp) from an agarose gel to remove residual primers and adapters. Purified library DNA was captured on an Illumina flowcell for cluster generation and sequenced on an Illumina HiSeq 2000 following the manufacturer's protocols.