Metabolic diseases in their protean incarnations are likely to define health, public policy, and economics of the 21stcentury. NoneAside from surgical remediation, progress in their treatment with lifestyle or pharmacologic therapies has been disappointing. Altered insulin signaling is often associated with excessive hepatic triglyceride content (hepatosteatosis), a correlate of hepatic failure, hepatocellular cancer and need for liver transplantation. NoneActivation of the nutrient-sensing mTorc1 pathway, a substrate of insulin/Akt signaling,Nonestimulates hepaticde novolipogenesis,Noneleading to hepatosteatosis. These parallel pathways allow the dissociation of insulin signaling in liver in obesity - FoxO1 action is unrestrained in the "insulin-resistant" state to stimulate gluconeogenesis and glycogenolysis, whereas higher plasma insulin levels accelerates flux through the preserved Akt/mTorc1 pathway, to simultaneously promote hepatic glucose production and hepatosteatosis. NoneThus, treatment of hepatocytes with rapamycin, an allosteric inhibitor of mTorc1, prevents insulin activation of the lipogenic transcription factorSrepb1c. None,NoneAlthough interpretation ofin vivorodent studies, and clinical experience in rapamycin-treated patients, is clouded by their effects to disrupt insulin signaling in other tissues and possible effects on mTorc2 function, mice with disruptions in hepatic mTorc1 signaling have offered insight into its role in regulation of glucose and lipid metabolism. None-NoneFor instance, liver-specific knockout of the mTorc1-defining component Raptor protects from diet-induced hepatic steatosis, likely due to reduced lipogenesis. NoneInterestingly, hepatocyte-specific knockout of Tsc1, a native mTor inhibitor, protects from diet-induced fatty liver due to mTorc1-independent effects on Insig2a, an Akt-dependent regulator of Srebp1c function, suggesting that the Akt and mTorc1 pathways intersect at multiple levels to integrate insulin and nutrient signals in the liver. NoneThe bifurcation of the insulin signaling pathways after Akt - to FoxO1 for glucose production, and to mTor/Srebp1c for lipogenesis - raises the question of whether these pathways have additional inputs. Notch signaling is critical for cell type specification and lineage restriction. NoneCell surface-tethered ligands (Jagged and Delta-like) bind Notch receptors on neighboring cells, resulting in a series of cleavage events that culminate in gamma-secretase-dependent liberation of the Notch intracellular domain (NICD). NoneNICD translocates to the nucleus, where it binds to and co-activates the transcriptional effector Rbp-Jk, promoting expression of theHairy enhancer of split(Hes) andHes-related(Hey)family of genes. NoneHomozygous null alleles of components of this signaling pathway result in embryonic lethality, demonstrating their importance to normal development. None-NoneImportantly, Notch signaling is therapeutically accessible, and inhibitors are in advanced clinical development for cancer. NoneThe homeostatic functions of Notch in the adult animal have received less attention, except in neoplastic processes. NoneWe have shown that liver Notch signaling is regulated in response to metabolic stimuli, and that Notch1 increases hepatic glucose production by co-activating FoxO1 at theGlucose-6-phosphatasepromoter. NoneConversely, liver-specific deletion of Rbp-Jk (L-Rbpjmice), or gamma-secretase inhibitor (GSI) treatment improves glucose tolerance, and reduces hepatocyte glucose production. NoneInterestingly, previous studies demonstrated that Notch1 can activate mTorc1 in leukemic cells, whereas GSIs decrease mTorc1 activity in breast cancer. None,NoneThus, we hypothesized that hepatic Notch could modulate the coordinate actions of insulin on gluconeogenesis (via FoxO1) and lipogenesis (via mTorc1). We describe here that inhibition of hepatic Notch protects from obesity-induced fatty liver, likely through decreasedde novolipogenesis. Conversely, constitutive hepatic Notch signaling stabilizes and activates mTorc1, leading to increased lipogenesis and fatty liver. We show that Notch-mediated hepatic steatosis is rapamycin-sensitive, whereas Notch-induced glucose tolerance is mTor-independent. These results establish Notch as a unique pharmacological target in liver, whose inhibition can prevent the twin abnormalities of hepatic insulin resistance - excessive glucose production as well as fatty liver - by virtue of its ability to uncouple Akt from mTor. Notch1 activation in liver, as reflected by cleavage at Val1744 and increased expression of Notch targets, increases with fasting. NoneIn early refeeding (0-2 h), Notch1 cleavage and target gene expression declined, followed by a second peak of Notch activation at later time points (4-12 h) (Fig. 1aandSupplementary Fig. 1). Notably, Notch activation during fasting coincides with increased gluconeogenic gene expression, while the second peak coincides with expression of Srebp1c and its targets (Fatty acid synthase,Fasn; and Acetyl-CoA-carboxylase,Acc1) (Fig. 1b-d), as well as activation of mTor (not shown). This induction was expectedly absent in livers from mice lacking hepatocyte Rbp-Jk (L-Rbpj) (Fig. 1e),Noneconfirming that classical Notch activation is affected by the nutritional state. Livers from mice fed a high-fat diet (HFD) also showed greater Notch activation than chow-fed littermates (Fig. 1f, g), as did hepatocytes and livers from leptin-signaling deficient mice as compared to controls (Fig. 1h, i), suggesting a cell-autonomous dysregulation of Notch signaling in obesity and fatty liver. As whole-body disruption results in embryonic lethality,Nonewe generated liver-specific Rbp-Jk knockout (L-Rbpj) mice, in which hepatocyte Rbp-Jk was deleted post-natally,Nonewith full recombination by 6-12 weeks of age. NoneWe have previously shown thatL-Rbpjmice are protected from obesity-induced insulin resistance. NoneGiven the interaction between Rbp-Jk and FoxO1,Nonewe hypothesized thatL-Rbpjmice would have similarly increased hepatic triglyceride as mice lacking liver FoxOs. None,NoneNotably, despite unchanged body weight,L- Rbpjmice showed lower HFD-induced hepatic steatosis (Fig. 2a, b), due to a 30-50% reduction in hepatic triglycerides (Fig. 2c). L-Rbpjlivers were smaller, without changes in adiposity (Fig. 2d) or serum lipids (Supplementary Fig. 2), as compared to Cre-control mice. Moreover, Rbp-Jk knockout prevented steatosis in mice lacking hepatic FoxO1 (Supplementary Fig. 3a),Nonesuggesting that Notch regulates hepatic lipid deposition independent of its known co-activation of FoxO1 targets. NoneWe evaluated cell-autonomous and non-autonomous pathways that regulate hepatic triglyceride accumulation. None,NoneVLDL secretion was unaltered inL-Rbpjmice (Supplementary Fig. 3b), as were plasma triglyceride levels after olive oil gavage (Supplementary Fig. 3c). Liver expression of fatty acid oxidation enzymesAcoxandCpt1a, serum ketones and beta-oxidation of exogenous fatty acids in primary hepatocytes were similarly unchanged (Supplementary Fig. 3d-f). Next, we studied lipogenesis -L-Rbpjlivers showed lower Fasn and Acc1 expression (Fig. 2e), leading to less fatty acid synthesis (Fig. 2f). InL-Rbpj-derived primary hepatocytes, we found impaired insulin-dependentSrebp1cexpression and activity, as assessed by lower expression ofFasnpromoter-driven luciferase containing a consensus Srebp1c binding siteNone(Fig. 2g, h). Alternative lipogenic pathways, including PPARgamma signaling, were unaltered inL-Rbpjmice (Supplemental Fig. 3g). NoneWe observed a similar protection from insulin resistance associated with lower hepatic triglycerides following short-term HFD feeding (Supplemental Fig. 4). These data indicate that blocking hepatic Notch reduces hepatic triglyceride, likely due to impaired Srebp1c-mediated lipogenesis. We next studied pathways that converge on Srebp1c, insulin/Akt and nutrient/mTor. NoneL-Rbpjlivers show higher insulin sensitivity, with higher Akt phosphorylation at the Pdk1 site, T308. NoneConversely, we noted repressed mTorc1 signaling, as indicated by lower phosphorylation of mTor and mTorc1 targets, p70 S6 kinase and 4E-BP1, after either 5h or 16h fasting as compared to control animals (Fig. 2iand not shown). None-NoneTo determine if this effect was cell-autonomous, we isolated primary hepatocytes from Cre-andL-Rbpjmice, and found that while Akt phosphorylation was higher (not shown), basal and insulin-stimulated p70 S6k phosphorylation were repressed (Fig. 2j). These data suggest that Notch is required for maximal hepatocyte mTorc1 activity. To exclude the possibility of a developmental phenotype inL-Rbpjmice, we tested if acute inhibition of Notch signaling can similarly protect from diet-induced fatty liver and reduce mTorc1 function. We transduced adult mice with a "decoy" Notch1 receptor that encodes only the extracellular domainNone,Noneand acts in a dominant-negative manner by sequestering endogenous ligand. Adenovirus-driven Notch1 decoy is preferentially expressed in the liver, and is poorly secreted into the circulation (not shown). Consistent with results fromL-Rbpjmice, Notch decoy administration to HFD-fed mice lowered glucose and insulin levels (Fig. 3a, b), as well as liver weight and triglyceride content (Fig. 3c, d), without affecting body or adipose weight (Supplementary Fig. 5a, b), as compared to Cre-control mice. Notch decoy inhibited Srebp1c cleavage, and Fasn and Acc1 expression (Fig. 3e) but did not affect fatty acid oxidation orPparyexpression (Fig. 3f) or serum lipids (Supplementary Fig. 5c, d). Notch decoy-transduced primary hepatocytes similarly showed lowerSrebp1cexpression (Fig. 3g), but no change inPparyor its targets (Supplementary Fig. 5e). Livers from Notch decoy-transduced mice demonstrated higher pAkt-T308, but lower pS6k-S389 (Fig. 3h). In sum, similar toL-Rbpjmice, acute reduction in hepatic Notch signaling increases insulin sensitivity, while simultaneously lowering mTorc1-mediated Srebp1c activity and hepatic triglycerides. Our loss-of-function studies suggest that Notch signaling is permissive for mTorc1 activation and diet-induced steatosis. We thus tested whether Notch gain-of-function would be sufficient to induce fatty liverin vivo. Chow-fed mice transduced with adenovirus encoding constitutively active Notch1 (N1-IC) showed higher liver weight and triglyceride (Fig. 4a-c), without concomitant changes in body weight or composition (not shown). N1-IC-transduced livers demonstrated higher Srebp1c cleavage, resulting in increased expression ofSrebp1candFasn(Fig. 4d, e). Consequently, primary hepatocytes transduced with N1-IC showed greater lipogenesis (Supplementary Fig. 6a). Importantly, N1-IC expression failed to alter lipogenic gene expression, fatty acid synthesis or hepatic triglycerides inL-Rbpjmice and hepatocytes (Fig. 4f, gandSupplementary Fig. 6b), suggesting that Notch-induced lipogenesis requires Rbp-Jk, similar its activation of hepatic glucose production. NoneNotch-induced lipogenic gene expression paralleled higher hepatic mTorc1 activity in fasted and (more markedly) refed animals (Fig. 4h), consistent with enhanced physiologic regulation of mTorc1. In hepatoma cells and mouse primary hepatocytes, activation of mTorc1 signaling by insulin and amino acids was potentiated by N1-IC (Fig. 4i), resulting in Srebp1c cleavage and activation (Fig. 4jandSupplemental Fig. 6c). These data suggest that Notch modulates, but does not override endogenous mTor regulation, in a cell-autonomous manner. To test the hypothesis that Notch induction of lipogenic gene expression and fatty liver requires mTorc1 signaling, we co-transfected hepatoma cells withFasn-luciferase and shRNA to Raptor,Nonethe defining component of the mTorc1 complex, then transduced cells with N1-IC. Notch-induction ofFasn-luciferase activity was potentiated by insulin, but reversed by Raptor knockdown or rapamycin treatment (Fig. 5aandSupplementary Fig. 7). Similarly, Notch induction of endogenousFasnin primary hepatocytes was augmented by insulin, and suppressed by rapamycin (Fig. 5b), suggesting that N1-IC-inducedFasnexpression is mTorc1-dependent. Based on these data, we hypothesized that higher lipogenic gene expression and fatty liver seen in mice transduced with N1-IC adenovirus would be ameliorated by rapamycin treatment. Indeed, Notch-mediated hepatic steatosis was completely reversed by rapamycin treatment (Fig. 5c). The effect of rapamycin was specific to Notch induction of lipogenic genes, asHeylandHey1were unaffected (Fig. 5d). Similarly, although rapamycin induced mild glucose intolerance (not shown),NoneN1-IC-transduced mice showed further exacerbation (Fig. 5e, f). These data show that Notch-induced hepatic steatosis, but not -hyperglycemia, is prevented by mTor inhibition. To study the mechanism of altered Notch-induced mTorc1 activation, we examined mTor complex levels inL-Rbpjmouse liver. We found unchanged levels of the shared mTorc1/mTorc2 components, mTor and Gbetal, and of the mTorc2-specific component Rictor, but a surprising reduction in the levels of Raptor protein (Fig. 6a), independent of changes inRaptormRNA (not shown), suggesting that the effects of Rbp-Jk deficiency on Raptor are post-transcriptional. Conversely, mice transduced with N1-IC adenovirus demonstrated higher liver Raptor protein (Fig. 6b). We found a similar increase of endogenous Raptor protein in hepatoma cells (Fig. 6c) or primary hepatocytes (not shown) transduced with N1-IC, without changes inRaptormRNA (Supplementary Fig. 8a). Transient transfection of Raptor cDNA in primary hepatocytes showed a similar effect, demonstrating that the action of Notch is independent of locus effects (Supplementary Fig. 8b). Notably, the effect of N1-IC was not recapitulated by proteosomal inhibition by MG132 (Fig. 6c), but was reversed by treatment of hepatocytes with the protein synthesis inhibitor, cycloheximide (Fig. 6d). Raptor overexpression was insufficient to induceFasn-luciferase whereas co-expression of N1-IC and Raptor produced a synergistic effect (Fig. 6e), consistent with previous work that Raptor overexpressionper sedoes not increase mTorc1 function. None,NoneLikewise, overexpression of Raptor was insufficient to activate mTorc1 in either primary hepatocytes or HEK 293 cells (not shown). We concluded that Notch induction of Raptor levels parallels, but does not cause increased mTorc1 activation, and hypothesized that increased Raptor levels are secondary to higher mTorc1 complex stability. Indeed, we found that Notch overexpression increased association among mTorc1 components in HEK 293 cells (Fig. 6f), regardless of whether Raptor (Supplemental Fig. 8c) or mTor (Supplemental Fig. 8d) was immunoprecipitated. Similar mTorc1 stabilization was observed in FAO hepatoma cells (Supplemental Fig. 8e) and mouse primary hepatocytes (Fig. 6g). Finally, Notch-stabilized mTorc1 complexes were resistant to increasing concentrations of CHAPS detergent known to disrupt mTor-Raptor interaction (Supplementary Fig. 8f). None-NoneIn sum, these data indicate that the Notch stabilizes and activates mTorc1, resulting in increasedde novolipogenesis and fatty liver. The role of developmental pathways in metabolic homeostasis of adult tissues is only beginning to be appreciated. NoneWe have shown that genetic or pharmacologic inhibition of Notch protects from diet-induced glucose intolerance, without effects on body weight or adiposity, in a FoxO1-dependent manner. NoneIn this work, we demonstrate a similar protection from fatty liver with inhibition of hepatic Notch signaling. This is unexpected, as inhibition of hepatic FoxO1 is associated with increased hepatic lipid deposition,None,None,None,Nonean increasingly recognized effect of shifting hepatic carbon flux from glucose to lipid production. NoneIn this regard, it appears that chronic (L-Rbpjmice) or acute Notch inhibition (Notch decoy), achieves the long-sought goal of decreasing hepatic glucose production without compensatory increases in hepatic lipid content. Interestingly, GSIs induce fatty liver, but do so in a Notch-independent fashion (U.B.P., manuscript in preparation), consistent with the idea that substrates of gamma-secretase include Notch-unrelated pathways, and restricting the repertoire of therapeutically viable Notch inhibitors that can be pursued for treatment of metabolic disease. Nonetheless, the many potential benefits of Notch inhibition, which include amelioration of atherosclerosis,Noneprovide in our opinion a strong rationale to pursue Notch inhibition as a treatment of the metabolic syndrome. NoneThe identification of Notch as a regulator of carbon flux towards hepatic glucose or lipid production (Fig. 6h) is a conceptual advance, as is the surprising finding that a molecular pathway thought to be specialized toward differentiation is regulated by physiologic (fasting/re-feeding), as well as pathologic (insulin resistance) metabolic cues in hepatocytes. We hypothesize that in the overfed and insulin-resistant state, Notch signaling is inappropriately activated, and reprises its developmental interactions with FoxO1 and mTorc1. The mechanisms underlying nutritional activation of hepatic Notch require further clarification. For example, it should be determined whether Notch activation in the hepatocyte requires input from neighboring hepatocytes or other resident liver cells (endothelial, stellate, Kupffer, etc.). Similarly, which of the five Notch ligands drives signaling in response to nutrients is unknown, and the possibility that different ligands signal in different metabolic states to direct carbon flux or drive differentiation is teleologically attractive. Besides the further validation of hepatic Notch as a therapeutic target, our data demonstrate a physiologic, and potentially pharmacologic, means of regulating mTorc1 activity and lipogenesis. Previous studies have indicated that tight control of hepatic mTorc1 signaling is critical for hepatic lipid metabolism. None,NoneThe tandem, but not necessarily related, findings of mTorc1 stabilization and activation by Notch deserve further study. Since the identification of Raptor as the mTorc1-regulatory subunit, it has been known that the mTor-Raptor association is sensitive to detergent concentrations;Nonesubsequent reports have confirmed this finding and identified potential post-translational modifications on Raptor,None,None,Nonebut none have been shown to mediate mTor-Raptor interaction. How Notch induces mTorc1 stability, but the demonstration that Raptor levels are decreased inL-Rbpjmice and that cycloheximide prevents Notch-induced stabilization indicates that a transcriptional target(s) of Notch regulates complex stability. In summary, Notch antagonism uncouples Akt from mTor activation, suggesting that Notch antagonists from oncology and neuroscienceNone,Nonemay be repurposed to treat fatty liver and diabetes. Furthermore, as Notch-mediated mTorc1 activation does not appear to be cell type-specific, modulators of mTorc1 processing and degradation may represent a therapeutic avenue to block mTorc1 activity without the metabolic liabilities of current mTor inhibitors. None