The upper cervical spine is composed of the occiput, atlas and axis. Half of the cervical flexion movement (between the occiput and C1) and half of the cervical rotation movement (C1-C2) occur in this region. The C1 vertebra is ring-shaped, presenting two lateral masses, with articular facets and absent vertebral body. The C2 vertebra has a vertebral body, with dentiform bone process that articulates with the anterior arch of C1, having two lateral masses and two laminas. The C1 and C2 vertebrae are stabilized by bone structures (odontoid process) and ligament structures (transverse ligament and alar ligament). One of the main aspects in relation to the anatomy of C1-C2 is the location of the vertebral artery,Nonewhich runs through the transverse foramen of C1, looping on both sides in the posteromedial direction up to its point of entry in the occipital foramen. This structure, therefore, is at risk during the passage of screws in both vertebrae. None,NoneIt is known that the upper cervical spine is frequently affected by pathologies that require some kind of surgical treatment, such as rheumatoid arthritis, Down syndrome, fractures, dislocations and ligament lesions. Countless techniques were described for fixation of the high cervical spine aiming at stable intervertebral fusion. Wiring techniques such as those of Brooks or Gallie are relatively simple procedures, yet have the disadvantage of requiring rigid immobilization after surgery, besides presenting high rates of pseudarthrosis (up to 30%). None,NoneWith the development of the synthesis materials, techniques arose that allow more stable fixation. The two methods most often used today are: the Jeannert and MagerlsNonetransarticular screw fixation technique and the Harms and Melcher C1 lateral mass and C2 pedicle technique. NoneBoth techniques, from the biomechanical viewpoint, are superior to the wiring technique and also involve the insertion of screws in the pedicles or through the pars interarticularis of C2, posing a significant risk for the vertebral artery, as hemorrhages, neurological sequelae and even death could occur. None,None-NoneWright and LauryssenNonedescribed a new fixation technique at C2 in ten cases. The technique consists of the passage of screws in the C2 laminas and achieved, according to another study by the same author, stability similar to that of the Magerl and MagerlNoneand Harms and MelcherNonetechniques, without the associated vascular and neurological complications. Due to the lower risk of complications associated with this technique and the higher success rate of arthrodesis, it becomes an attractive treatment option. Ferri de Barros et al. Noneconducted a tomographic study comparing the adequacy of fixation screws in C2 pedicles and laminas in children from two to eleven years of age, and obtained data that enable them to infer that the C2 lamina represents a viable point of fixation for C1-C2 and craniocervical arthrodesis in children,Nonewhich would allow the application of the Wright technique in children. The objectives of this study were to evaluate the dimensions of the following anatomical structures in the Brazilian pediatric population: lamina, pedicle and lateral mass of C2; and to validate for our population the data obtained with this study. Sixty-four cervical tomographic scans acquired during routine outpatient and emergency care provision in the complex of Hospital das Clinicas of Universidade de Sao Paulo were analyzed retrospectively. Patients between two and 10 years of age were selected with the gathering of data referring to their age and sex. The patients were divided into two age groups: from 24 to 48 months and from 49 to 120 months, respectively named group 1 (18 cases) and group 2 (43 cases). Cases that presented anatomical abnormalities in the cervical spine or fracture of the level studied (three cases) were excluded. Using the ImageJ(r)imaging program, the dimensions and angulation of the laminas, pedicles and lateral masses were evaluated in an axial section of C2 corresponding to the height midpoint of the lamina (parasagittal section). The thickness of the C2 lamina was measured in millimeters (mm). The measurement was performed at the point of least thickness between the internal cortical layers. Each measurement will be performed in a specific manner for each side of the lamina. (Figure 1) The length (mm) of the laminas was measured in the same axial section. The measurement was performed from the external cortex opposite to the lamina to the limit of the visible length in that section. (Figure 2)Measurement of the C2 lamina thickness (E,F).Measurement of the laminar angle and length (A,B). The spinolaminar angle was drawn for both sides, with one of the lines inside the C2 lamina parallel to the cortices of this lamina, and another line passing through the center of the spinous process and odontoid process dividing the vertebra into two hemivertebrae. (Figure 2)The pedicle thickness was measured in the same axial section, at its narrowest point. (Figure 3) The length in the same section was measured from the point of entry in the lateral cortex to the anterior cortex in the vertebral body. (Figure 3) The length of the lateral mass was measured from the transition of the lamina with the mass to the opposite cortex. (Figure 3)Measurement of the lateral mass length (A,B), pedicle thickness (C,D) and pedicle length (E,F). A statistical analysis with theSPSS 13.0 for Windowsprogram was carried out using thet-test. Mean, standard deviation, minimum and maximum value data were obtained. The data relating to age, sex and laterality (right and left) were combined with the abovementioned anatomical measurements. Of the 64 tomographic scans analyzed, 45 were of the male and 16 of the female sex. Three were excluded from the study as they contained fracture at the level analyzed. The average age of the total group of patients was 66.83 +/- 28.93 months; the average age of group 1 was 32.16 +/- 9.06 months while that of group 2 was 81.34 +/- 20.79 months. Since no significant difference (p greater than 0.05) was observed in the measurements in relation to laterality, the results presented correspond to the measurements obtained without considering the sides. Tables 1,2and3present respectively the mean values with the standard deviation and the minimum and maximum values of the anatomical measurements of the lamina, pedicle and lateral mass according to age groups and gender. Mean anatomical values and variation for the Lamina. Mean anatomical values and interval for the Pedicle. Mean anatomical values and interval for the Lateral Mass. In group 1 it was observed that 5.5% of the laminas and 8.3% of the pedicles have a thickness of less than 3.5mm. In group 2 there are no laminas with thicknesses of less than 3.5 mm and only 1.2% of the pedicles have a thickness of less than 3.5mm. The frequency of the lamina and pedicle thicknesses is represented inFigures 4and5. Frequency versus lamina thickness.Frequency versus pedicle thickness. There is no lamina and pedicle length of less than 12mm in either age group. The spinolaminar angle, measured close to the laminar screw positioning angle, had only 5% of the values below 41o, and 90% are below 51.8o degrees. We did not record lateral mass lengths of more than 12mm in either age group. In analyzing the data obtained, it was possible to observe that there were no statistically significant differences (p greater than 0.05) as regards laterality in either one of the groups, for all the measurements performed. The difference observed between the sexes was not statistically significant. In group 1 it was observed that only 5.5% of the laminas had a thickness of less than 3.5mm. In group 2 there are no laminas with a thickness below this value. There is no lamina length of less than 12mm in either group. The lowest and highest lamina thickness value obtained was 3.3 and 5.4mm, respectively. It can be concluded that the passage of screws through the lamina is practicable in both groups studied, as in general the smallest screws commercially available for this purpose have a thread diameter of 3.5mm and a length of 12mm. The spinolaminar angle, in both groups, had only 5% of the values below 41o and 90% was below 51.8o degrees. The smallest angle found was 40o while the largest was 53o. The mean of the spinolaminar angle was 45o in group 1 and 47.1o in group 2, and this information is of practical use in the surgical technique. The data obtained in the two groups considering sex as a variable were not statistically significant (p greater than 0.05). In group 1, it was observed that 8.3% of the pedicles have a thickness of less than 3.5mm, while this value was only 1.2% in group 2. There is no pedicle length of less than 12mm in either group. The lowest and highest pedicle thickness value obtained was 3.1 and 5.6mm, respectively. Although the data obtained show that it is anatomically possible to insert a screw in the pedicle of the pediatric population studied, we should consider the high risk of injury to the vertebral arteryNonewith this technique, with a narrow margin of error. We have various techniques available for fixation of the high cervical spine targeting stable intervertebral fusion. Wiring techniques such as those of Brooks or Gallie are relatively simple procedures, yet have the disadvantage of requiring rigid immobilization after surgery, besides presenting high rates of pseudarthrosis. None,NoneThe Jeannert and MagerlsNonetransarticular screw fixation technique and the Harms and Melcher. NoneC1 lateral mass and C2 pedicle technique are more commonly used today. From the biomechanical viewpoint, techniques using screws are superior to the wiring technique but have the disadvantage of the risk of injury to the vertebral artery, spinal cord and roots. None,None-NoneIn comparison to the data obtained by Ferri et al. Nonein 2010 where 24% of the C2 pedicles and 65% of C2 laminas were considered suitable for the insertion of 3.5mm screws, we had a higher percentage of cases in which such passage would be anatomically possible. The lateral mass length in both groups is around 9mm; hence the fixation technique with lateral mass screw in C2 is not a safe treatment option in the pediatric population studied. The tomographic analysis of the axis in the pediatric population from 2 to 10 years of age showed that the anatomical dimensions studied allow the insertion of screws in the laminas and pedicles in most cases, taking into account the materials available in the market with a diameter of 3.5mm. In surgical practice in relation to the spinolaminar angle a basal value of around 45o can be adopted as a reference in the insertion of screws in the C2 lamina. The small length of the lateral mass of C2 observed in the study does not allow the insertion of the smallest screw available in the market for this purpose.