Rho kinases, ROCKs, are serine/threonine kinases that were initially identified as activated Rho (Rho-GTP) interacting proteinsNone. ROCKs function as versatile kinases, phosphorylating various substrates such as myosin light chain (MLC) phosphatase, LIM kinase, PTEN, insulin receptor substrate (IRS), ezrin/radixin/moesin (ERM) proteins, and JNK interacting protein (JIP-3)None-None. Two ROCK isoforms exist-ROCK1 (ROKbeta) and ROCK2 (ROKalpha). Both isoforms consist of a N-terminal kinase domain, a coiled-coil region consisting of a Rho binding domain (RBD), a pleckstrin homology domain (PH) and a cysteine rich domain (CRD). The isoforms share 92% homology in their kinase domain and phosphorylate a consensus motif R/KXS/T or R/KXXS/TNone. These enzymes play a role in varied cellular processes including cell-cell adhesion, migration, invasion, transformation, mitosis, DNA-damage and apoptosisNone,None,None,None. In addition, accumulating evidence strongly suggests a role of ROCK in glucose metabolismNone,None,None, although the exact mechanisms involved remain to be elucidated. A highly conserved, regulated process of self-cannibalization to maintain cellular homeostasis and regain energy is termed 'autophagy'. Autophagy occurs under basal conditions, for example to degrade long-lived proteins, but is mainly induced in response to stressNone,None. Under stress, such as an infection, autophagy is known to target pathogens to lysosomal degradationNone,None. Conversely, during metabolic stress, autophagy provides ATP for cellular activity and preserves cell viabilityNone,None. Metabolic stress is common in cancer cells that have outgrown their nutrient supply because proliferation outpaces angiogenesis which provides nutrients. Under such harsh conditions, cancer cells must adapt, and they do so by inducing autophagy, a process whereby the cells "self-eat" and also protect themselves from cell death. Autophagy, characterized by the formation of autophagosomes, is an orchestrated process involving several steps: initiation, nucleation, elongation, maturation and degradation. At least 15 different proteins are involved in the formation of autophagosomesNone. Beclin1 (ATG6) is a well-conserved protein and plays a central role during the autophagy process. Beclin1 was initially identified as the anti-apoptotic protein, Bcl-2, interacting partnerNone-None. During non-stress, normal conditions, Bcl-2 binds Beclin1 and inhibits autophagosome formation. However, upon starvation, Beclin1 is released from Bcl-2 and can then proceed to perform its function in autophagyNone,None. In addition, Beclin1 forms a multiprotein complex with PI(3)KC3 (Vps34) and UVRAG, a coiled-coil, UV irradiation resistance-associated gene, to induce autophagosome formationNone. Beclin1 null mice are embryonic lethal, and Beclin1 heterozygous mice show a higher incidence of spontaneous tumor developmentNone. Also, Beclin1 is known to be deleted/underexpressed in several types of cancers, including breast and ovarianNone,None. Recently, it was reported that Beclin1, as well as UVRAG, are mutated in cancer cells with microsatellite instabilityNone,None. These observations suggest a crucial role of Beclin1 during autophagy and tumor suppression. Related to this, ROCK1 overexpression has also been observed in a number of cancers and is associated with poor prognosisNone-None. Furthermore, activating ROCK1 somatic mutations were identified in human cancersNone. Interestingly, ROCK is known to play a major role in degradation of mutant Huntington protein via proteasome degradation and autophagyNone. In addition, a recent report suggests a role of ROCK in autophagosome size regulationNone. Here we identify Beclin1 as a novel ROCK1 substrate that is phosphorylated during metabolic stress. We further show that ROCK1 phosphorylates Beclin1 in its BH3 domain, allowing for Bcl-2 dissociation during nutrient stress to induce autophagy. Inhibition of ROCK1 activity leads to autophagy impairment, causing cell death in glucose starved cancer cells. Thus, our findings identify ROCK1 as a critical regulator of metabolic stress signaling and provide new insights into its role in autophagy. Since we hypothesized that ROCK1 may play a key role during nutrient stress, we performed co-immunoprecipitation-mass spectroscopy (MS) study to identify ROCK1 interacting proteins. Endogenous ROCK1 was immunoprecipitated from HeLa cells incubated in normal (DMEM) or HBSS (starvation) media, and the resulting precipitates were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis. Several proteins, including Beclin1, PKM2, XRCC6 and STK38, were identified as putative binding partners of ROCK1 under nutrient stress conditions (Fig. 1aSupplementary Table S1). Moreover, upon starvation, the abundance of both Beclin1 and ROCK1 increased in the 20,000g fraction (corresponding to ER/mitochondria) and in the 100,000g fraction (cytosol) (Supplementary Fig. S1a). To confirm the MS results, co-immunoprecipitation experiments were performed in both HeLa (Fig. 1a, right panel) and 293T (Fig. 1b) cells under normal (high glucose) and starved (HBSS) conditions. The interaction of Beclin1 with ROCK1 observed under normal (high glucose) conditions increased significantly during HBSS treatment. To further confirm Beclin1 interaction with ROCK1 during metabolic stress, live-cell imaging and FRET was performed. Upon addition of HBSS, N-terminal YFP-tagged ROCK1 associated with CFP-tagged Beclin1 (Fig. 1c). Additionally, confocal analysis showed that Beclin1 exhibited a diffuse cytoplasmic pattern and did not appear to co-localize with ROCK1 in the presence of glucose. However, when the cells were starved, Beclin1 translocated to the perinuclear region and was observed in close proximity to ROCK1 (Supplementary Fig. S1b). All of these results suggested that ROCK1 interacts with Beclin1 in response to nutrient starvation. To determine whether ROCK1 activity was necessary for Beclin1 interaction, cells were treated with a well-established Rho kinase inhibitor, Y27632, and endogenous ROCK1 or Beclin1 was pulled down in the presence or absence of HBSS. Similar to results inFig. 1a and 1b, Beclin1 binding to ROCK1 increased upon starvation in non-treated cells (Fig. 2a). However, in Y27632-treated cells, this interaction was significantly decreased. This result suggests that ROCK1 activity is needed for Beclin1 interaction. To test whether ROCK1 activity increased upon glucose starvation, we performed anin vitrokinase assay with ROCK1 immunoprecipitated from HeLa and EJ cells grown in the presence of HBSS for various time points utilizing MYPT1, a known substrate of ROCK1. As shown inFig. 2b, ROCK1 from starved cells was able to phosphorylate MYPT1 efficiently as compared to ROCK1 from control cells (non-starved). Moreover, endogenous ROCK activity was upregulated upon starvation as seen by increase in P-MYPT1 (Fig. 2c). Also, ROCK activity increased significantly upon metabolic stress in cancer and non-cancer cell lines, as observed by ELISA assay, using MYPT1 as a substrate (Fig. 2dSupplementary Fig. S2). Next, to examine whether increase in ROCK1 activity depended on Beclin1 interaction, we determined ROCK1 activity in Beclin1 knockdown cells upon starvation. As shown inFig. 2e(left panel), Beclin1 was efficiently knocked down in HeLa cells; however, there was no down regulation of ROCK activity. This data suggests that Beclin1 interaction with ROCK1 is downstream of increase in ROCK activity. ROCK1 was initially identified as an effector of RhoA-GTPase and is activated by RhoA-GTP under several conditionsNone,None. To determine, whether increased ROCK1 activity upon metabolic stress is due to RhoA-GTP, we performed active RhoA assay. Rhotekin binding assay was performed using cell lysates from HeLa cells incubated in DMEM or HBSS. We did not observe an increase in active RhoA upon metabolic stress, suggesting that increase in ROCK1 activity was independent of RhoA (Supplementary Fig. S3a). ROCK1 cleavage and activation by caspase-3 has been well documented under certain stress conditionsNone. However, no significant ROCK1 cleavage was observed during nutritional stress (Fig. 2c). Another family of Rho-GTPase, RhoE, is also known to regulate ROCK1 activityNone. Therefore, we examined RhoE levels upon glucose starvation. As shown inSupplementary Fig. S3b, RhoE was upregulated in starved HeLa cells. To determine whether ROCK1 activity was regulated by RhoE during metabolic stress, we next knocked down RhoE (Supplementary Fig. S3b) and incubated these cells in DMEM or HBSS media. RhoE knockdown increased ROCK activity upon starvation (Supplementary Fig. S3c), suggesting that RhoE may negatively regulate ROCK1. This result is consistent with previous reports that show RhoE, unlike RhoA, can regulate ROCK1 in a negative mannerNone. Taken together, these results indicate that the increase of ROCK1 activity upon metabolic stress is independent of RhoA and is required for Beclin1 interaction. Since Beclin1 is a proximal component in the autophagy machinery, we examined the role of ROCK1 during nutritional stress-induced autophagy. To do so, we monitored lipidated LC3 (LC3II) levels, which are known to correlate with autophagosome formationNone. ROCK1-/-MEFs were compared to WT MEFs in HBSS media. Upon starvation, WT MEFs showed an increase in LC3II, as well as an increase in LC3 punctae determined by immunofluorescence (Fig. 3a). However,ROCK1-/-MEFs exhibited a significant decrease in LC3 punctae (Fig. 3a), suggesting ROCK1 is essential for efficient autophagy process. Additionally, using shRNA (shROCK1-#1), as well as siROCK1-#2 and siROCK1-#3, we observed specific knockdown of ROCK1 (Fig. 3b), without affecting ROCK2 levels (Supplementary Fig. S4a). Levels of processed LC3 (LC3II) in EJ cells grown in glucose-rich media were low, as compared to cells that were nutrient deprived (HBSS) (Fig. 3b, left panel). Conversely, LC3 processing was not observed following nutrient deprivation if ROCK1 was silenced (Fig. 3b, left panel). Similarly, siRNA mediated suppression of ROCK1 in HeLa cells reduced lipidated LC3 levels upon starvation (Fig. 3b, right panel, andSupplementary Fig. S4a). It is known that LC3II on autophagosomes is degraded upon autophagosome and lysosome fusionNone. Therefore, to assess autophagic flux, Bafilomycin A1, a drug that inhibits this fusion and thus prevents autophagic vacuole maturationNone, was used. As in previous experiments, Y27632 treatment inhibited the accumulation of LC3II upon metabolic stress in HeLa cells (Fig. 3c), in the presence of Bafilomycin A1. Furthermore, p62, a multifunctional adaptor protein that is cleared by autophagyNone, accumulated in Y27632 treated cells (Supplementary Fig. S4b). To further examine autophagic flux, we used DQ Red BSA (DQ-BSA), which is labeled with a self-quenched red fluorescent dye and can emit fluorescence upon lysosomal protease cleavage. As shown inSupplementary Fig. S5, we observed a significant increase in dequenched DQ-BSA labeled vesicles co-localizing with GFP-LC3 punctae in control-starved cells, but not in Y27632-treated cells. This suggests that inhibition of ROCK1 suppresses autophagosome formation directly, rather than by interfering with lysosomal activity, thus affecting autophagic flux. We further investigated whether ROCK1 plays a role in autophagy by examining the morphological features of endogenous LC3 (seen as punctae). HeLa cells left untreated or treated with the ROCK inhibitor Y27632 were cultured in HBSS media, and the patterns of LC3 punctae were analyzed by immunofluorescence. Fig. 3dshows an increase in LC3 punctae upon starvation in control cells in the absence of Y27632. However, the addition of Y27632 significantly impaired LC3 punctae formation upon nutrient stress (Fig. 3d). In addition, EJ cells with ROCK1 knockdown and shCont. were stably transfected with GFP-LC3 and subjected to starvation. In shCont. transfected EJ cells, GFP-LC3 punctae were significantly induced upon starvation, indicating upregulated autophagy (Supplementary Fig. S4c). However, in shROCK1#1 cells, GFP-LC3 punctae were markedly decreased under stress conditions (Supplementary Fig. S4c). To further confirm that ROCK1 is required for autophagy, starved EJ cells with shCont. or shROCK1#1 were examined via transmission electron microscopy to detect autophagosome formation (Fig. 3e). Consistent with our evidence that LC3 cleavage is highly compromised in shROCK1 cells, we observed a defect in autophagosome/autolysosome formation in these cells. Next we investigated whether impaired autophagy due to loss of ROCK1 affected cell viability. Inhibition of ROCK1 activity during starvation resulted in a significantly decreased cell viability (shROCK1 ~1.9 fold; Y27632 ~1.96 fold) as compared to control (glucose fed) HeLa or EJ cells (Supplementary Fig. S6, left panels). In addition, as evidenced by Alamar blue cell death assay (Supplementary Fig. S6a, right panel), ROCK1 stable knockdown in EJ cells led to increased loss in cell viability. Moreover, while TUNEL staining of siCont. transfected HeLa cells after nutrient starvation showed 36.3% positive cells, siROCK1 transfected cells had 90.6% TUNEL positive cells under the same experimental conditions (Supplementary Fig. S6b, right panel). Taken together, these results indicate that ROCK1 activity is essential for functional autophagy and that impairment of ROCK1-mediated autophagy can increase cell death at early time points. Since ROCK1 is a Ser/Thr kinase and ROCK1 binding to Beclin1 is enhanced upon glucose starvation, we hypothesized that Beclin1 is a direct substrate of ROCK1 in response to nutrient deprivation. To determine whether Beclin1 would be phosphorylated under these conditions, endogenous Beclin1 was immunoprecipitated from fed or starved cells and immunoblotted with anti-phospho Ser/Thr. As shown inFig. 4a(lane 2), Beclin1 indeed was phosphorylated after glucose starvation, while ROCK inhibitor Y27632 blocked this phosphorylation (lane 4). Similar results were obtained upon ROCK1 knockdown (Supplementary Fig. S7a). The phosphorylation of Flag-tagged Beclin1 purified from HeLa cell extracts or recombinant Beclin1 was measuredin vitrofollowing incubation with recombinant ROCK1. Full-length recombinant His-Beclin1 (Supplementary Fig. S7b) was phosphorylated by recombinant ROCK1, and this phosphorylation was blocked by Y27632 (Fig. 4b). Similarly, when Flag-Beclin1 purified from HeLa cell extracts was incubated with ROCK1, we observed ROCK1-mediated phosphorylation of Beclin1 as visualized by32P autoradiogram. This phosphorylation was a direct result of ROCK1 kinase activity, since the addition of Y27632 significantly inhibited32P incorporation. These data suggested that Beclin1 phosphorylation induced by starvation is likely ROCK1 dependent. Next, we prepared a series of partially overlapping Flag fusion fragments of Beclin1 spanning the entire length of the Beclin1 protein. These various Flag-Beclin1 fragments (comprising residues: 1-242, 151-241 and 243-450) were tested as possible substrates for ROCK1 (Fig. 4c). Of the Beclin1 fragments, only Flag-Beclin1 1-242 (comprising the N-terminal 242 aa of Beclin1) was strongly phosphorylated by recombinant ROCK1 (Fig. 4c). Further exploration of Beclin1 1-242 fragment for the consensus sequence of ROCK1 substrate, R/KXS/T or R/KXXS/T, identified several putative ROCK1 phosphorylation sites. Using the Kinexus PhosphoNET kinase predictor (http://www.phosphonet.ca/kinasepredictor), potential ROCK1 sites were narrowed down to Ser22, Thr38 and Thr119 (Supplementary Fig. S8). Mutational analyses of ROCK1 consensus sites identified that a mutant form of Flag-Beclin1 1-242, harboring a threonine to alanine substitution at Thr119 (Flag-Beclin1 T119A), was not phosphorylated by ROCK1 (Fig. 4d). To further confirm that endogenous Beclin1 was phosphorylated at T119 and this site phosphorylation depended on ROCK1, we used a phospho-specific antibody against this site. We first confirmed the specificity of this antibody, using Flag-Beclin1 T119A mutant (Fig. 4e). As shown inFig. 4e, starvation induced Flag-Beclin1 WT phosphorylation at T119, and this stress-induced phosphorylation was decreased upon addition of ROCK inhibitor, Y27632. However, we did not see any phosphorylation of T119A mutant upon starvation. We further confirmed if ROCK1 could phosphorylate endogenous Beclin1 at T119 using Myc-ROCK1 WT, CA (constitutively active) or DN (dominant negative) transfected cells (Supplementary Fig. S9). Endogenous Beclin1 immunoprecipitated from ROCK1 CA transfected cells was highly phosphorylated at T119. In comparison, Beclin1 T119 phosphorylation was significantly suppressed in ROCK1 DN transfected cells (Supplementary Fig. S9). Thus, these results strongly suggest that ROCK1 can directly phosphorylate Beclin1 at T119 under nutritional stress. T119 lies in the ROCK1 consensus motif and is highly conserved among species (Supplementary Fig. S8). Moreover, it was previously reported that this site resides in the BH3 domain and, therefore, we reasoned that it might contribute to Beclin1-Bcl-2 interactionNone,None. To test whether ROCK1 phosphorylation of Beclin1 was indispensable for its dissociation from Bcl-2, we performed immunoprecipitation experiments. Beclin1 binding to Bcl-2 was inhibited upon starvation in HeLa cells, as compared to glucose fed control cells (Fig. 5a). However, Y27632 treatment significantly increased Beclin1 binding to Bcl-2 by approximately 4-fold in high glucose conditions and maintained a similar level of association between Bcl-2 and Beclin1 upon HBSS starvation (Fig. 5a). Similar results were obtained with EJ shCont. and shROCK1 stable transfectants (Fig 5a) and HeLa siCont. and siROCK1#2 (Supplementary Fig. S10b), confirming that ROCK1 was required for Beclin1/Bcl-2 uncoupling for autophagy to proceed during starvation. To determine whether ROCK1 phosphorylation of Beclin1 was necessary for its interaction with other binding partners in the Beclin1-core complex, Vps34 and UVRAG proteins were examined. As shown inSupplementary Fig. S10c, similar levels of Vps34 and UVRAG were pulled down in the presence or absence of Y27632. These results indicate that ROCK1 phosphorylates Beclin1 at Thr119, and this phosphorylation disrupts the Beclin1/Bcl-2 complex without affecting other Beclin1 binding partners, such as Vps34 and UVRAG, during the autophagy process. To determine whether the loss of phosphorylation at Thr119 could recapitulate inhibition of ROCK1 kinase activity during metabolic stress, we generated and compared Bcl-2 binding activity of WT, T119A (phospho-mutant) and T119E (phospho-mimetic) mutant forms of Beclin1. HeLa cells transfected with a Flag-Beclin1 WT construct in the presence of HBSS showed only slight Bcl-2/Beclin1 interaction (Fig. 5b, lane 1). Furthermore, inhibition of ROCK1 activity by Y27632 significantly increased the binding of Bcl-2 to Beclin1, as expected (Fig. 5b, lane 2). In agreement, Beclin1-T119A mutant pulled down endogenous Bcl-2 upon starvation similar to that of Y27632 treatment (Fig. 5b, lane 3). In contrast, the association of Bcl-2 with the T119E Beclin1 mutant was barely detectable upon nutrient stress, due to a phospho-mimetic effect of the mutant (Fig. 5b, lane 4). To confirm that T119 phosphorylation required for Bcl-2 dissociation was ROCK1 dependent, we examined Bcl-2 association of WT and T119A Beclin1, in the presence and absence of Y27632. As shown inFig. 5c, Bcl-2 could not dissociate from Beclin1 T119A mutant and this was not further affected by the addition of ROCK inhibitor, Y27632. All of these results indicate that ROCK1 phosphorylation of Beclin1 at Thr119 is important for Bcl-2 dissociation. To further understand the importance of Beclin1 phosphorylation by ROCK1 in its dissociation from Bcl-2 during autophagy, we knocked down endogenous Beclin1 using siRNA towards the 3'UTR, then ectopically expressed WT and mutant Beclin1 in these cells and examined LC3 processing. Consistent with the previous results, expression of Flag-Beclin1 WT induced higher levels of LC3II upon starvation, and this was inhibited upon Y27632 addition (Fig. 5d). However, Beclin1 T119A mutant transfected cells had very low levels of LC3II upon metabolic stress and was not further affected by Y27632. In addition, WT and mutant transfected cells were subjected to morphological analysis of LC3. Similar to the results from biochemical analysis (Fig. 5), Flag-Beclin1 WT transfected cells were able to induce LC3 punctae upon starvation. In addition, the treatment with Y27632 led to a significant decrease in endogenous LC3II (Fig. 5e). Of note, the Flag-Beclin1 T119A mutant showed impaired LC3 punctae formation, confirming true phospho-mutant activity. Consistently, the Flag-Beclin1 T119E (Supplementary Fig. S11) mutant allowed cells to accumulate LC3 punctae at the autophagosomes, further confirming that phosphorylation of Beclin1 at Thr119 by ROCK1 is crucial for nutritional deprivation mediated autophagy. To determine whether ROCK1 plays an important role in autophagyin vivo, we investigated starvation-induced autophagy inROCK1knockout mice. ROCK1knockout mice were generated using the Flp-Cre system (Fig. 6a). The knockout (KO) was confirmed by genotyping and western blot analyses (Fig. 6b, top and bottom panels, respectively). To monitor autophagy, levels of LC3II were evaluated in mice starved for 16 h. InROCK1KO hearts, the level of lipidated LC3 was markedly reduced, as compared to starved Wt mice (Fig. 6candSupplementary Fig. S12a). In addition, p62/SQSTM1, a scaffold protein known to be ubiquitinated and degraded via autophagy, accumulated at higher levels inROCK1KO hearts (Fig. 6c). As shown inFig. 6d, it was possible to observe autophagosome structures in Wt starved tissue but not inROCK1KO mice. In addition, when cardiac muscle from starved mice were stained for the presence of endogenous LC3 punctae, there was a significant decrease in LC3 puncta formation inROCK1KO mice (Fig. 6eandSupplementary Fig. S12). Taken together, these results indicate that the loss of ROCK1 substantially impairs autophagyin vivo. Using a proteomics approach, we identified Rho kinase1 (ROCK1) as a vital player during nutrient stress-induced autophagy. We showed further that Beclin1, an axial component of the autophagy machinery, is a substrate of ROCK1 when challenged with nutrient deprivation. The anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-2 serves as autophagy regulatory protein through its inhibitory association with Beclin1None,None. Our results show that ROCK1 is activated during metabolic stress, leading to its increased binding and phosphorylation of the Beclin1 BH3 domain. We further demonstrate that metabolic stress-mediated ROCK1 phosphorylation of Beclin1 results in dissociation of Bcl-2 from the Beclin1 multiprotein complex without affecting UVRAG-Beclin1 interactions, and ultimately leads to autophagy (Fig. 7). Consistent with an essential function of ROCK1 during the metabolic stress mediated autophagy process in tissue culture cells, we demonstrated that the loss of ROCK1 function in mice substantially impairs autophagy during fasting. The function of ROCK1 in membrane blebbing during apoptosis has been studied extensivelyNone,None. We showed that impairment of ROCK1-mediated autophagy could lead to loss of cell viability under conditions of nutritional stress. These results imply that ROCK1 plays additional roles to avoid cell death by providing energy in less severe stressful circumstances. Thus, there appears to be an intricate balance of crosstalk between autophagy and apoptosis that is regulated by ROCK1 (Fig. 7). Recently, other groups have also identified that ROCK1 regulates survival rather than apoptosis, under certain conditionsNone, supporting our results. However, it remains to be determined how ROCK1 kinase is activated under metabolic stress conditions. Several studies have shown that active RhoA-GTP binding to ROCK1 is required for ROCK1 activationNone,None. However, we did not observe any increase in RhoA-GTP binding to ROCK1 upon nutritional stress, suggesting that other ROCK1-activating modulator(s), such as RhoE, may play a role. By mutational analysis, we localized Beclin1 Thr119 as the site of phosphorylation by ROCK1 upon starvation. This site is known to be a ROCK1 consensus motif, which is highly conserved among species, and is localized within the Beclin1 BH3 domain implicated in Bcl-2 bindingNone-None. We further demonstrated that Beclin1 phosphorylation at T119 by ROCK1 is crucial for the disassociation between Beclin1 and Bcl-2 during the autophagy upon metabolic stress. Recent reports suggest that DAPK (death associated protein kinase) also promotes autophagy via several different mechanismsNone,None-None. DAPK has also been reported to phosphorylate Beclin1in vitroat T119, resulting in the loss of interaction with Bcl-XL, but whether this mechanism is involved in nutritional stress-mediated autophagy has not been determinedNone. It is known that ROCK1 and DAPK share a consensus motif, R/KX/S/T or R/KXXS/T, for target phosphorylationNoneand share some common substrates, such as ZIPKNone,None. Thus, each may phosphorylate Beclin1 under particular conditions. Nonetheless, our results suggest that ROCK1 is the major kinase responsible for phosphorylating Beclin1 at T119 and subsequently promoting the progression of autophagy during starvation. In this study, ROCK1-mediated phosphorylation of Beclin1 during nutrient stress leads to the induction of autophagy. However, ROCK1 may modulate autophagy through alternate mechanisms during nutrient stress. For example, ROCK1 was previously shown to activate the JNK pathway through JIP-3 phosphorylationNone, and upon nutrient deprivation, activated JNK phosphorylates Bcl-2, resulting in the dissociation of Bcl-2 from Beclin1 and subsequent activation of autophagyNone. Therefore, ROCK1 may modulate autophagy, not only through Beclin1 phosphorylation but concomitantly through ROCK1-mediated JNK activation, where these two arms essentially disrupt the Beclin1-Bcl-2 association and promote autophagosome formation. Further studies are needed to elucidate additional mechanisms by which ROCK1 regulates autophagy. ROCK1-induced autophagy may have critical functions in physiological and pathological contexts. Recent data suggests that Bcl-2 regulated autophagy during exercise is necessary to maintain glucose homeostasis in the muscle. However, previously known kinase-phosphorylation of Bcl-2, such as JNK and MAPK, do not seem to play a role in this processNone. Possibly, ROCK1-mediated phosphorylation of Beclin1, as shown here, could be important for Bcl-2 regulated autophagy during exercise. Although, ROCK1 and Beclin1 are well conserved among species, both genes are mutated in several human cancersNone,None,None-None. Activating mutations of ROCK1 suggest a positive role for ROCK1 during cancer progressionNone,None. Accumulating evidence strongly suggest that autophagy may not only promote cancer cell survival but may also lead to chemoresistanceNone-None. Since ROCK1 plays a central role in autophagy and may promote cancer progression, inhibiting ROCK1 activity in cancer cells, in addition to chemotherapy, may help improve prognosis for cancer patients. Taken together, our data outlines a novel regulatory mechanism in which ROCK1 plays an essential role during metabolic stress-induced autophagy. HeLa (human cervical cancer cells), EJ (human bladder cancer cells), 293T (human embryonic kidney cells), and IMR90 (normal human fibroblasts) cells were cultured in DMEM (CellGro) containing 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) (Invitrogen, CA), 100 U/ml penicillin and 100 ug/ml streptomycin at 37 degrees C. Where indicated the cells were incubated in HBSS (CellGro) containing 10 mM HEPES-KOH (pH7.5). The cDNA encoding Beclin1 was obtained from Open Biosystems (Clone: 2901072). Full-length Beclin1 (1-242) was then cloned into pcDNA3.1-Flag by PCR, using standard procedure. Mutagenesis in full-length Beclin1 (T119A, T119D and T119E) was performed using the megaprimer method. The obtained clones were sequenced in entirety to ensure no additional mutations were introduced during the PCR mutagenesis process. Flag-Beclin1 fragments (1-242,151-241 and 243-450) were obtained from AddgeneNone. Mutagenesis of Flag-Beclin1 1-242 fragment to obtain S22A, T38A and T119A was performed by similar method as detailed above. pEGFPC1-LC3 is described elsewhereNone. Antibodies used in this study are as follows: ROCK1 (IP: C19; WB: H85 (1:2000); IF: K18 (1:700), Santa Cruz), ROCK2 (H85 (1:2000), Santa Cruz), Beclin1 (IP: K15, Santa Cruz; WB: 3495 (1:2000), Cell signaling; IF: 55556 (1:700), Novus), PDI (3501 (1:1000), Cell signaling), Mek1/2 (M17030 (1:1000), Transduction Laboratories), Flag (M2 (1:200-1:500), Sigma), LC3 (3868 (1:1000), Cell Signaling), p-MYPT1 (04-773 (1:500), Millipore; 5163 (1:500), Cell Signaling), MYPT1 (2634 (1:1000), Cell Signaling), p-Ser/Thr (22A, (1:250-5% milk) BD Biosciences), p62 (5114, (1:1000), Cell signaling), p-T119 Beclin1 (AP3765a (1:400), Abgent), beta-actin (A5441 (1:10000), Sigma), and DAPI (1:10,000, Roche). Bafilomycin A1 (Sigma) was dissolved in DMSO, and Y27632 (Calbiochem) was dissolved in water. Complete protease inhibitor and PhosStop phosphatase inhibitor cocktail tablets were purchased from Roche. For cDNA and siRNA transfection, Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen) and X-tremeGENE (Roche), respectively, was used according to manufacturers' protocols. For endogenous ROCK1 and Beclin1 immunoprecipitation, Crosslink IP kit (Thermo Pierce) was used according to manufacturer's recommendation with a few changes. In short, ROCK1 or Beclin1 antibody was crosslinked to Protein A/G agarose (Santa Cruz) using 450 uM DSS. Cells were lysed with the provided IP lysis buffer (0.025 M Tris, 0.15 M NaCl, 0.001 M EDTA, 1% NP-40, 5% glycerol; pH 7.4) supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Roche), incubated on ice for 1h, passed through a syringe and then centrifuged. Normalized lysates were mixed with ROCK1- or Beclin1-conjugated beads overnight, washed 4* with 0.2% lysis buffer, followed by elution for 15 min at RT. Flag IP was performed according to manufacturer's protocol and precipitated proteins were eluted using elution buffer (Thermo Pierce). Myc-IP was performed using Myc-conjugated agarose from Cell Signaling (3400). For immunoblot analysis, cells were lysed with 1% Triton X-100 (v/v) lysis buffer (0.02 M Tris, 0.005 M EDTA, 0.01 M Na4P2O7, 0.1 M NaF, 0.002 M Na3VO4and 1% Triton X-100) with protease/phosphatase inhibitor cocktail, resolved by NuPAGE (Invitrogen) gels and transferred onto nitrocellulose membrane for detection with antibodies. Subcellular fractionation was performed as described previouslyNone. Full-length images of immunoblots are shown inSupplementary Figures S13 and S14. For ROCK1 and Beclin1 fluorescence, cells were grown on glass coverslips, subjected to glucose starvation and fixed with cold methanol for 10 min. Fixed cells were washed 3* with 0.1% PBS-Triton X-100 (PBST), blocked with 5% BSA-1% calf serum-containing PBST for 1 h at RT and incubated with primary antibodies (1:700 each) overnight. Staining was visualized with Alexa Fluor secondary antibodies using the Nikon A1 confocal microscope. For LC3 staining, cells on coverslips were cultured in DMEM or HBSS for indicated times. Cells were then washed in ice-cold PBS and fixed in chilled acetone for 5 min. LC3 puncta were labeled with anti-LC3B and counterstained with DAPI. For EJ cells stably transfected with GFP-LC3, treated cells were fixed in 2% paraformaldehyde for 10 min at RT. Cells were then washed extensively to remove any debris, counterstained with DAPI and examined using Zeiss VivaTome microscope. HeLa cells were transfected with pZsYellow1-C1 (Clonetech-632444)-ROCK1 (cloned using SacI and SacII RE sites) and mCER (Addgene-15214)-Beclin1 (cloned using EcoRI and BamHI). For simplicity purpose, pZsYellow1-C1-ROCK1 was addressed as YFP-ROCK1 and mCER-Beclin1 as CFP-Beclin1. Transfected cells were plated on a glass bottom petri dish (Fluorodish, World Precision Instrument, INC, Sarasota, FL) and maintained in normal (+ glucose) DMEM media before switching to starvation (HBSS) media. Cells were placed on a Nikon Eclipse-Ti confocal microscope system equipped with an oil immersion 60* NA 1.49 apo-TIRF objective, perfect focus and an environmental control incubation chamber (37 degrees C, 5% CO2).The emission fluorescence intensities were determined at 540 +/- 15 nm (YFP) and 482 +/- 18 nm (CFP) with a high-speed resonant scanner (dichroic mirror 457/514). The FRET ratio analysis was performed as previously describedNone. The FRET ratio was corrected for both the bleed-through of CFP into the 540 nm channel and the cross-talk due to the direct YFP excitation by light at 440 nm. Control experiments were performed with single fluorophore transfected cells maintained in DMEM with high glucose. Media was changed to HBSS by perfusion, just as in FRET experiments. For recombinant Beclin1, bacterial expression construct, pRSET, containing His-Beclin1 (full-length), was transformed inEscherichia coliBL21. Cells were induced with 1mM IPTG at 30 degrees C for 2h. Cell pellet was resuspended in cold PBS and subjected to ultrasonication. Protein was purified using TALON beads (Clonetech) following the manufacturer's protocol. In vitrokinase assay was performed using His-Beclin1 as substrate and recombinant ROCK1 (Millipore). HeLa cells were transiently transfected with Flag-Beclin1 constructs using Lipofectamine 2000. 36 hrs post-transfection, cells were harvested in lysis buffer supplemented with protease inhibitors. Immunoprecipitation with Flag-agarose was performed and washed, and the resulting immune-complexed beads were used as substrate for thein vitrokinase assay. Forin vitrokinase assay, recombinant MYPT1 (12-421, Millipore) or recombinant His-Beclin1 or Flag-Beclin1 constructs were used as substrates. Endogenous ROCK1 (immunoprecipitated from EJ cells) or recombinant ROCK1 was used as the kinase as indicated in figure legends. The kinase assay was performed as previously describedNone. In short, the substrate and kinase were incubated in kinase buffer (20 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 5 mM MgCl2, 100 mM KCl, 0.1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 100 uM adenosine triphosphate (ATP), 1 mM EDTA, 1 uM microcystin-LR, and 1 uCi [32P]ATP) at 30 degrees C for 40 min. Reaction was terminated using SDS-loading buffer, and proteins were resolved on 4-12% gel (NuPAGE), dried and exposed to film overnight at -80 degrees C.Tissues were fixed in 2.0% glutaraldehyde in 0.1 M sodium cacodylate buffer, pH 7.4 (Electron Microscopy Sciences, Hatfield, PA) overnight at 4 degrees C. They were rinsed in buffer, post-fixed in 1.0% osmium tetroxide in cacodylate buffer for 1 hour at room temperature, rinsed in buffer again and dehydrated through a graded series of ethanol to 100%. They were then infiltrated with Epon resin (Ted Pella, Redding, CA) in a 1:1 solution of Epon:ethanol. The following day they were placed in fresh Epon for several hours and then embedded in Epon overnight at 60 degrees C. Thin sections were cut on a Leica EM UC7 ultramicrotome, collected onto formvar-coated grids, stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate and examined in a JEOL JEM 1011 transmission electron microscope at 80 kV. Images were collected using an AMT digital imaging system (Advanced Microscopy Techniques, Danvers, MA). Cells were fixed in the same glutaraldehyde fix for 1 hr at room temperature. They were rinsed, scraped and pelleted and osmicated as above. After further buffer rinses, they were embedded in 2.0% agarose for ease of handling and dehydrated, infiltrated and embedded in Epon. TheRock1allele in these animals contains loxP sites flanking exon 5 as describedNone. The floxed mice (Rock1flox/flox) were bred with EIIa-cre mice to generate mice heterozygous for Rock1 exon 5 deletion (Rock1flox/-). Rock1flox/-heterozygous mice were then intercrossed to generateRock1-/-homozygous mice, designated as ROCK1 knockout mice. All animals were housed in a temperature-controlled environment with 12-hr light/dark cycles and ad libitum access to food and water. For starvation studies, male mice (8 weeks of age) were deprived of food for 16 hr in clean cages but received water ad libitum. ROCK1 (+/+) and ROCK1 (+/-): n = 6 (fed) and n = 5 (starved); ROCK1 (-/-): n = 3 (fed) and n = 3 (starved) mice were used. Experimental mice were euthanized by cervical dislocation and hearts were harvested immediately and processed for immunofluorescence (washed in PBS and placed in OCT) or frozen in liquid nitrogen for molecular analysis. These tissue samples were then lysed in lysis buffer using a Tissue Lyser on ice for 2 min. Protein was measured using Bradford, normalized and resolved on SDS-PAGE. All animal experiments were approved by the Subcommittee on Research Animal Care of Massachusetts General Hospital (Protocol #2005N000022).