The ability to select a small number of cells from a heterogeneous population is fundamental to many aspects of biological research. Selections form the basis of genetic screens, of protein engineering and directed evolution, and of protocols to produce stably transformed or genome-edited cell lines. In many instances, one would like to select cells on the basis of complex dynamic or morphological features. For example, in a culture of olfactory neurons, one might screen for calcium flux in response to a specific odorant; and then wish to select responsive cells for subsequent transcriptional profiling. Or in a culture with single genes knocked down by an siRNA library,None,Noneone might find cells with unusual shapes, organelle sizes, or metabolic responses; and then wish to select these cells to determine which gene had been knocked down. These types of selections are difficult to perform with existing tools. The most common selection technique uses fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS),Nonewhich requires a robust static fluorescence signal. Laser-capture microdissectionNone,Noneselects cells or tissue regions one at a time, and so can have limited throughput, and is usually performed on samples that have been chemically fixed. Imaging cytometryNone,Nonetypically functions in a flow-through geometry, and so is not compatible with selections of surface-bound cells such as neurons; nor with selections that probe dynamic cellular responses. Spatially patterned photochemistry is becoming widely applied in cell biology for its ability to induce specific reactions in complex patterns of space and time. NonePhotochemical pre-patterning of cell adhesion molecules enables cell growth in complex morphologies,None-Noneand photopatterned hydrogels are now used to direct cell culture in three dimensions. None-NoneIn these applications the pattern is defined prior to plating the cells. For screening purposes one would like to define the adhesion pattern after plating the cells, only retaining cells with a user-specified phenotype. Two recent demonstrations showed photochemical release of cells from a photodegradable surface,None,Nonebut in these protocols the surface had to be specially prepared prior to cell culture. Photochemical radical initiators have been used in macroscopic tissue bonding applicationsNoneand found to produce minimal toxicity. NoneHere we describe a photochemical tissue bonding scheme to capture single cells grown on a standard tissue culture substrate. We synthesized a cell-impermeable photochemical crosslinker that also labels selected cells with a fluorescent marker and a biotin group. By using a custom ultra-wide field epi-fluorescence microscope equipped with a digital micromirror device (DMD) to pattern the violet illumination, multiple single cells were selected in parallel from fields of view containing up to ?4000 cells. Fig. 1Aillustrates the photostick protocol. Cells are cultured on glass-bottom dishes coated with fibronectin or other cell adhesion protein. Cells of interest are selected by video microscopy and computational image processing. A cell-impermeant photochemical crosslinker (Fig. 1B) is added to the dish. A digital micromirror device (DMD) projects patterned violet illumination targeting the cells of interest (Fig. 1C), typically with 3.25 mum spatial resolution over a 6 mm * 3 mm field of view. The crosslinker immobilizes these cells on the dish. The dish is then rinsed with buffer to remove unreacted crosslinker. To develop the pattern, the dish is incubated with accutase, a mild protease. Cells outside the illuminated region are washed away, while the illuminated cells remain adherent. Initially we tested the photostick protocol with a water soluble phenyl azide radical initiator, 4-fluoro-3-nitrophenyl azide (FNPA, Fig. S1None). Upon exposure to violet light (407 nm) this compound releases N2and produces a nitrene radicalNone-Nonethat reacts with protein functional groupsviaa sequential abstraction-recombination mechanism. None,NoneRadical formation on both fibronectin and cellular surface proteins led to covalent cross-linking of cells to the dish surface. We added FNPA at a concentration of 4 muM to cultures of epithelial MDCK cells and exposed to patterned 407 nm light (825 J cm-2). The pattern was developedviaincubation with accutase (3 min, 37 degrees C) followed by rinsing with buffer. The remaining cells clearly followed the illumination pattern (Fig. S1None). FNPA has a calculated octanol/water partition coefficient of log P= 3.0, implying high membrane permeability. NoneWe were thus concerned that the initiator could enter the cells, crosslinking internal components and perturbing cell physiology. Furthermore, other than location on the dish, there was no clear indication of which cells had been targeted for selection. Therefore we synthesized two trifunctional photochemical crosslinkers, Cy3- and Cy5-SBED, by reacting an aminated fluorescent dye (Cy3 or Cy5) with sulfo-SBED (sulfo-N-hydroxysuccinimidyl-2-(6-[biotinamido]-2-(p-azido-benzamido)-hexanoamido)-ethyl-1,3'-dithioproprionate) (Fig. 1B). The product contained a fluorescent group, a biotin group, and an aryl azide photochemical radical initiator. The two sulfate groups and the large size of the construct suggested that it would show poor membrane permeability, while the dye allowed easy tracking. The biotin gave the option for downstream labeling with streptavidin, but was not used in this study. We quantified the selectivity of the photostick protocol as a function of Cy3-SBED concentration and illumination dose (Fig. S2 and S3None). The optimal conditions depended on cell type,e.g. 4 muM Cy3/5-SBED at light dose 825 J cm-2was optimal for MDCK cells (Fig. 2and S2None), while 15 muM Cy3/5-SBED at light dose 2200 J cm-2was optimal for neurons (Fig. 3C and D). To test the viability of cells after a photostick procedure, we returned a dish of patterned MDCK cells to the incubator. A live-dead stain showed 98% live cells subsequent to a photostick protocol (Fig. S4None). The cells continued to migrate and divide (Fig. S5None) with a doubling time of 34 h.We performed successive photostick protocols on a sample of MDCK cells (Fig. 2A and B), first with a green dye, Cy3-SBED (4 muM, 825 J cm-2), and then with a red dye, Cy5-SBED. Upon wash-out of the dyes, the illuminated cells showed strong fluorescence corresponding to the color dye with which they were exposed. We did not detect a difference in Cy5 labeling efficiency between the cells that had already been labeled with Cy3 and the cells that had not, indicating that a small fraction of reactive sites on the cell surface were occupied by each dye. Incubation with accutase (3 min, 37 degrees C) detached the un-exposed cells while leaving the exposed cells (Fig. 2B). High magnification images (Fig. 2C) showed that the fluorescence was localized to the cell membrane. Absence of intracellular fluorescence confirmed that the dye-SBED compounds did not enter the cells. In nine repeated trials 98.7% (147 of 149) photostuck cells remained (Fig. 2F, bar 1), while 0.04% (21 of ?50 000) of non-photostuck cells remained (Fig. 2F, bar 2; see also Fig. S6None). Thus the photostick method has high selectivity, specificity and accuracy for the targeted cells (Fig. 2F). Fig. 2D and Eshow a low-magnification field of view of MDCK cells before (Fig. 2D) and after (Fig. 2E) the photostick protocol. A natural application of the photostick technique is to select single clones from a genetically heterogeneous culture. These clones could be producede.g. by library lentiviral knockdown of endogenous genes,Noneor by overexpression of a library of functional endogenous or heterologous genes. Thus we sought to test the suitability of the photostick protocol for genetic profiling of single cells selected from a heterogeneous culture. First we tested whether genetic information could be retrieved from a single cell selected by photostick. MDCK cells expressing YFP were plated sparsely in a background of non-expressing cells (Fig. 3A). A single YFP-positive cell was selected by photostick (4 muM Cy5-SBED). After accutase treatment (3 min, 37 degrees C), only the single targeted cell was visible (Fig. 3B). The selected cell was then releasedviatrypsinization, and its genetic content was analyzed by single-cell PCR (ESI methodsNone). The YFP gene product was detected (Fig. 3Clane 1). The experiment was repeated with selection of a cell lacking YFP expression. No YFP gene product was detected (Fig. 3Clane 2). Next we tested whether genetic information from surrounding cells could contaminate the genetic material amplified from the cell selected by photostick. Such contamination could arise, for instance, by lysis of surrounding cells; or by surrounding cells remaining adhered during the accutase treatment but then being released by trypsin. InFig. 3, three YFP-positive cells were selected by photostick (4 muM Cy5-SBED) out of a background population dominated by cells expressing mOrange. After accutase treatment only these three cells remained (Fig. 3D-G). These cells were released with trypsin. Amplification with consensus primers for YFP and mOrange led to a single band (Fig. 3H, lane 1). Amplification with primers selective for mOrange did not produce a product (Fig. 3H, lane 2). These results established that mOrange DNA from the surrounding cells did not contaminate the photostick-selected YFP-expressing cells, despite the large number of mOrange-expressing cells initially in the population. Finally, we tested the ability to select cells on the basis of a complex functional parameter. Our lab recently developed a platform for all-optical electrophysiology ("Optopatch") in cultured neurons. NoneWe expressed the Optopatch construct in cultured rat hippocampal neurons, and used a wide-field imaging system for simultaneous optical stimulation and optical recording from a field of view containing ?40 neurons expressing the Optopatch construct. We selected a neuron that showed a rapidly adapting firing pattern (Fig. 4C), added Cy3-SBED (15 muM) to the imaging medium, and selected the cellviaphotostick (Fig. 4A). After incubation with accutase (6 min, 37 degrees C), the selected neuron remained, while the other neurons had been washed away (Fig. 4B). The photostick protocol kept the cell body, but not the distal neurites. PCR recovered the Optopatch genes from the selected cell (Fig. 4D) and subsequent sequencing recovered the complete gene sequence. The 407 nm light used for photostick is not directly absorbed by proteins or nucleic acids, but could excite cofactors such as FAD. We demonstrated that the photostick protocol preserved viability of MDCK cells, but one may worry about more subtle cellular perturbations or stress associated either with the violet light exposure or with the covalently bound dyes. The significance of these perturbations depends on the application. When the selected cells are immediately fixed or lysed for biochemical analysis (e.g. DNA or RNA sequencing, or proteomics) optical perturbation effects will likely be minor, due to the short interval between violet illumination and cell harvest. When the selected cells are to be grown into a stable cell line, optical perturbation effects will also likely be minor, due to the many generations of growth required before use, providing time for cells to recover. However, when the selected cells will be used for functional assays shortly after selection, we advise appropriate control experiments to test for illumination artefacts. Each cell type and culture protocol will likely require optimization of the parameters. We recommend a two-step procedure: first, without using the photostick protocol, one should determine the minimum accutase incubation time to lift the cells. This determination can be performed in a single dish by gently pipetting the accutase solution and periodically checking for cell detachment. Second, one should determine the concentration of Cy3- or Cy5-SBED and illumination dose to achieve accutase-resistant adhesion, starting from the parameters presented here. Cells adhered by the photostick protocol will not be detached by the shear associated with gentle rinsing. The photostick protocol worked with substrates coated with either fibronectin or poly-d-lysine, and we anticipate similar results with any surface presenting primary amines (e.g. lysine) or hydroxyl groups (e.g. serine). For screening applications, one is particularly concerned about the proportion of false positives among the selected cells. Suppose there areNcells initially on the dish, the false-positive rate isf(cells that should be washed away but remain), and the true positive rate isp(cells that should remain and do remain). To achieve a ratio,R, of true-positive to false-positive cells, one should selectn=RNf/pcells. In our experiments, the false positive rate ranged from 0 to 2%, with the undesired cells often adhering around a defect in the dish. Through careful attention to preparation of the dish one can minimizef. By increasing the accutase incubation time one can further decreasefat the expense of a modest decrease inp. One can increase the illumination dose or the concentration of crosslinker to maximizep. Under strong illumination, scattered light can crosslink cells adjacent the desired cell. We found that selections worked best with MDCK cells, whose large size facilitated single-cell selection. In highly confluent cultures of HEK cells, application of photostick to a single cell often retained one or more of its adjacent neighbors as well. Modern high-resolution cameras and advanced image processing can characterize biochemically significant numbers of cells in experimentally reasonable timescales. In principle, computational methods could select based on a vastly larger set of parameters than can be selected by biochemical or pharmacological means, but an unresolved challenge has been how to physically isolate cells of interest from a complex culture. The photostick approach could be used to identify genes whose over- or under-expression affects complex aspects of cell morphology, dynamics, or response to perturbations. This method could also be useful to select antibodies or other functional proteins expressed from a library at one copy per cell. Finally, photostick could be used in the generation of stable cell lines, where gene expression is detected by a morphological or functional parameter rather than fluorescence or antibiotic resistance.