T cell-dependent antibody responses are a pillar of adaptive immunity; they constitute protective responses against a wide variety of pathogens, form the basis of the immune memory induced by the vast majority of effective vaccines, and underlie the pathogenesis of many autoimmune and allergic disordersNone,None. T follicular helper (TFH) cells are a subset of CD4+T cells specialized to provide signals that induce B cell growth, differentiation, immunoglobulin isotype switching, affinity maturation, and antibody secretionNone. They are defined by Bcl-6, a transcriptional repressor that is necessary and sufficient to direct TFHcell differentiationNone-None, and by abundant expression of the chemokine receptor CXCR5 and PD-1 (ref. None). TFHcell differentiation begins very early in the immune response, coinciding with rapid proliferation that expands the pool of responding cells. Bcl-6 is induced very early during T cell activation and is further upregulated in developing TFHcellsNonein conjunction with upregulation of CXCR5 and downregulation of CCR7 (ref. None). These changes in homing receptor expression allow developing TFHcells to migrate to the boundary between the T cell zone and B cell follicles of secondary lymphoid organs, where they encounter antigen specific B cellsNone. Continued cognate interactions with antigen-presenting germinal center (GC) B cells within lymphoid follicles further polarize TFHcellsNoneand help to maintain the TFHcell phenotypeNone. Besides their established role in orchestrating humoral immunity, TFHcells and transient TFH-like transition states of activated CD4+T cells have been implicated in the course of TH1 cell differentiationNone,Noneand the generation of central memory T cellsNone,None. MicroRNAs have emerged as important regulators of many aspects of immune cell differentiation and functionNone. The cell fate decisions of activated T helper cells are very sensitive to precise dosing of regulatory factorsNone, and are therefore subject to regulation by the fine-tuning activity of miRNAs. There is some evidence that miRNAs regulate the TFHcell gene expression programNoneand the plasticity of TFHcellsNone. However, the contribution of miRNAs to TFHcell differentiation and function remains largely unknown. Here we show that global miRNA expression in CD4+T cells was absolutely required for the differentiation of TFHcellsin vivo, independent of any proliferative defects associated with miRNA deficiency. Furthermore, we found that the miR-17~92 cluster was particularly important for robust TFHcell responses. In a protein immunization model, miR-17~92 contributed to the differentiation of an early CXCR5hiBcl-6hiTFHcell population, in part by targetingPten. In a viral infection model, miR-17~92 repressed TFHsubset-inappropriate gene expression. In this regard, we identified and validatedRoraas a direct miR-17~92 target that contributed to the pronounced phenotypic changes observed. We conclude that miRNAs are very important regulators of TFHcell differentiation and function. To investigate the global role of miRNAs in TFHcell differentiation and function we transferred naive, congenically marked (CD45.2+) miRNA-deficientDgcr8?/? CD4+T cells bearing an OT-II transgenic T cell receptor (TCR) specific for Ovalbumin (OVA) or control miRNA-sufficient (Dgcr8+/?) OT-II cells into CD45.1+wild-type recipients and subsequently immunized the mice with OVA. miRNA-deficient OT-II cells were severely reduced in the draining lymph nodes 4.5 days post immunization compared to control OT-II cells (Fig. 1a). Among the remaining Dgcr8?/? OT-II cells, the frequency of CXCR5hiPD-1hiTFHcells was substantially reduced compared to transferred control cells (Fig. 1a), while endogenous TFHcell frequencies were very similar in both sets of recipients (Supplementary Fig. 1a). The reduced generation of TFHcells resulted in significantly reduced relative and absolute numbers of FAS+Bcl-6+GC B cells (Fig. 1b). Thus, T cell-intrinsic miRNAs are critical for TFHcell responses and GC formation. To distinguish between impaired proliferation and a potential intrinsic defect in TFHcell differentiation, we tracked TFHcell generation according to the number of cell divisions in the adoptive transfer modelNone. miRNA-deficient T cells proliferated significantly less than control cells (Fig. 1candSupplementary Fig. 1b). Early Bcl-6 induction was comparable between miRNA-deficient and control cells, as all proliferating cells upregulated Bcl-6 and maintained less expression for several further cell divisions (Fig. 1candSupplementary Fig. 1b, compare Dgcr8?/? to non-immunized). However, miRNAs were critical for further upregulation of Bcl-6 in developing TFHcells as they proliferated further (Fig. 1c, compare Dgcr8?/? to control). In addition, miRNA-deficient T cells completely failed to upregulate CXCR5, sustained abnormally high CCR7 expression, failed to accumulate in proximity to B cells at the boundary between the T and B cell zones, and did not enter B cell follicles (Fig. 1candSupplementary Fig. 1b-e). Thus, miRNAs are essential for TFHcell differentiation and function. Very little is known about the function of specific miRNAs or miRNA loci in TFHcells. A previous report proposed that Bcl-6 inhibits miR-17~92 expression to prevent it from directly repressing CXCR5 (ref. None), which would interfere with T cell migration and inhibit TFHcell generation and function. However, T cell activation induces miR-17~92 expressionNone,Noneand overexpression of miR-17~92 in lymphocytes leads to a lupus-like autoimmune syndrome with elevated antibody titers, hinting at elevated TFHfunctionNone. To directly test whether miR-17~92 inhibits or promotes TFHcell generation, we infected mice lacking miR-17~92 only in T cells (CD4-Cre+miR-17~92fl/fl; hereafter T17~92?/?) with lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV). Compared to T17~92+/+control mice, T17~92?/? mice exhibited a pronounced reduction in splenic TFHcells and a severe impairment in GC B cell generation (Fig. 2a), together with an overall reduction in spleen cellularity and the frequency of activated (CD44hi) T cells (Supplementary Fig. 2a,b). Although T17~92?/? mice also lack miR-17~92 in the cytotoxic CD8+T cells that mediate LCMV clearance at this stage of disease, viral clearance was similar at day 8 post infection in T17~92?/? and control mice (data not shown). Thus the impaired antiviral TFHresponse was not an indirect consequence of reduced viral clearance. Of note, deletion of one copy of the miR-17~92 cluster in T17~92+/? mice resulted in an intermediate phenotype (Fig. 2aandSupplementary Fig. 2a,b). Using nitrophenyl (NP)-OVA protein immunization as a second, non-infectious model we confirmed that T cell-expressed miR-17~92 was required for TFHcell differentiation and indirectly for GC B cell formation (Fig. 2b). Again, deletion of one copy of the miR-17~92 cluster in T17~92+/? mice resulted in an intermediate phenotype (Fig. 2b). In contrast to the LCMV model, draining lymph node cellularity and total activated T cell numbers were similar in T17~92?/? and control mice (Supplementary Fig. 2c,d), indicating a specific defect in TFHcell generation. This defect resulted in delayed and significantly reduced NP-specific antibody titers (Fig. 2c), and a similar trend was observed in LCMV antibody responses (Supplementary Fig. 2e). In summary, T cell-intrinsic miR-17~92 is required for optimal TFHand germinal center responses including antigen-specific antibody production. Although overexpression of miR-17~92 cluster miRNAs promotes T cell proliferationNone-None, adoptively transferred naive CD4+T cells displayed only marginally reduced (T17~92?/?) or unchanged (T17~92+/?) proliferation compared with miR-17~92-sufficient control cells (Fig. 3a,Supplementary Fig. 3a). T17~92?/? cells also proliferated slightly less than control cells when activated with low amounts of anti-CD28 costimulationin vitro. However, this defect could be overcome by increasing amounts of anti-CD28 costimulation (Supplementary Fig. 3b). Thus, the miR-17~92 cluster is largely dispensable for T cell proliferation under these conditions, possibly due to partial compensation by the closely related miR-106a~363 and miR-106b~25 clusters. In contrast, transferred miR-17~92-deficient OT-II cells displayed severely reduced frequencies and total numbers of CXCR5+Bcl-6+developing TFHcells (Fig. 3b). Tracking the early generation of TFHcells revealed a differentiation defect independent of cell division. Both Bcl-6 and CXCR5 upregulation were impaired in T17~92?/? OT-II cells, resulting in a much smaller proportion of CXCR5+Bcl-6+developing TFHcells at each cell division compared to miR-17~92-sufficient controls (Fig. 3c,d,Supplementary Fig. 3c). Defective TFHcell differentiation was also reflected by a reduction of IL-21 producing cells (Fig. 3e) and a substantial increase in dividing CXCR5-cells expressing the high affinity interleukin 2 (IL-2) receptor alpha chain CD25 (Fig. 3f), which inhibits TFHcell differentiationNone,None. TFHcell generation was also reduced among T17~92+/? OT-II cells, indicating that miR-17~92 cluster miRNAs are limiting factors for TFHcell differentiation (Supplementary Fig. 3d). In summary, 17~92?/? CD4+T cells displayed a TFHcell differentiation defect remarkably similar to that observed in cells lacking all miRNAs, underscoring the prominent functional importance of this particular miRNA cluster. Consistent with the idea that TFHdifferentiation depends on miR-17~92, adoptively transferred OT-II cells overexpressing the cluster in the form of a human transgene (17~92tg/tg) showed enhanced TFHcell generation without substantially increased proliferation upon protein immunization (Fig. 4a-d). In unimmunized T17~92tg/+mice, endogenous polyclonal TFHcell numbers were also substantially increased in Peyer's patches, with a corresponding increase in GC B cells (Fig. 4e). Although total B cell and CD4+T cell numbers were generally increased, GC B cells and TFHcells were preferentially expanded. Finally, numbers of CXCR5hiPD-1hiFoxp3+T follicular regulatory (TFR) cells (but not polyclonal Treg) correlated with miR-17~92 dosage, suggesting that among all Treg the subset of Treg localized in GCs (TFR) are particularly sensitive to regulation by miR-17~92 (Supplementary Fig. 4). Thus, artificially increasing miR-17~92 enhances TFHcell differentiation and constitutive miR-17~92 overexpression leads to an accumulation of TFHcells. Ptenhas been implicated as an important contributing target in miR-17~92 overexpressing disease models of autoimmunity and lymphomagenesisNone,None,None. 17~92?/? OT-II cells exhibited significantly elevated PTEN expression in all responding cells at 48 h post-immunization (Supplementary Fig. 5a), and especially in the first few cell divisions at later time points (Supplementary Fig. 5b). Conversely, 17~92tg/tgOT-II cells exhibited reduced PTEN expression (Supplementary Fig. 5c). To test the functional relevance of miR-17~92-mediated repression of PTEN, we genetically limitedPtento one allele. Deletion of one allele ofPtenreduced PTEN expression (Supplementary Fig. 5d) and partially rescued Bcl-6 and CXCR5 induction in early cell divisions of 17~92?/? Pten+/? OT-II cells (Supplementary Fig. 5e). However, 17~92?/? Pten+/? and 17~92?/? OT-II T cells displayed similar frequencies of CXCR5+Bcl-6+cells at later divisions, suggesting important contributions from additional targets. Although the repression of individual miRNA target genes is generally modest, the aggregate biological impact can be largeNone,None. To obtain a sufficient number of TFHcells for genome-wide transcript analysis, we transferred SMARTA (SM) LCMV-specific TCR-transgenic CD4+T cells into wild-type recipients, infected them with LCMV and then purified TFHcells for microarray analysis (Fig. 5a). The number of 17~92?/? SM TFHcells was also reduced in this system, which was due to a proportional overall reduction in SMARTA cells (Supplementary Fig. 6). Genome-wide transcript analysis showed that as a group, predicted mRNA targetsNoneof each miRNA family within the miR-17~92 cluster were derepressed in 17~92?/? SM TFHcells (Fig. 5b). In contrast, predicted miR-29 targets previously shown to be actively repressed by miR-29 in T cells were unaffected in 17~92?/? SM TFHcellsNone. Moderately upregulated mRNAs were enriched for predicted miR-17~92 targets (Supplementary Tables 1,2). In addition, 17~92?/? SM TFHcells showed a striking increase in a recognizable set of TFHcell-inappropriate genes includingCcr6,Il1r2,Il1r1,Rora, andIl22(Fig. 5candSupplementary Table 1). Increased protein expression was validated for CCR6 and IL-1R2 by flow cytometry. Both were highly expressed in many 17~92?/? SM TFHcells but only in a few CXCR5-17~92?/? non- TFHcells (Fig. 5a,d). The majority of these non-TFHcells were T-bethiTH1 cells (data not shown). Additional gene dysregulation in TFHcells was confirmed by qPCR. Il1r1andRorawere derepressed in 17~92?/? SM TFHcells (Fig. 5e). Ex vivore-stimulation of SMARTA cells also revealed striking increases in the proportion of IL-22+IL-17A-cells and to a lesser extent IL-22+IL-17A+cells, but no increase in IL-17A+single-producing cells (Fig. 5f). Thus, miR-17-92 repressedCcr6,Il1r2,Il1r1,RoraandIl22during TFHdifferentiation. However, it remained unclear if those genes were directly targeted by miR-17~92 or whether the observed dysregulation was an indirect effect. Roraencodes the RAR-related orphan receptor alpha(RORalpha). Since this nuclear receptor is sufficient to induce IL-1R1 (ref. None) and CCR6 (ref. None), and IL-1R1 (ref. None) partially depends on RORalpha, we considered the possibility that unrestrained RORalpha expression may account for part of the observed subset-inappropriate gene expression in 17~92?/? TFHcells. TheRora3' UTR contains two clusters of predicted miRNA binding sites, each including four conserved miR-17~92 binding sites (Supplementary Fig. 7). Transfection of primary wild-type and 17~92?/? T cells with luciferase reporter constructs showed that endogenous miR-17~92 repressed both clusters, while miR-17~92 overexpressing T cells displayed enhanced repression (Fig. 6a). We isolated the effect of each miRNA by co-transfecting miRNA-deficient T cells with reporter constructs and individual miRNA mimics. This analysis revealed perfect correlation between target site predictions and repressive activity of the corresponding miRNAs (Fig. 6b). We conclude that all 4 miRNA families represented in the miR-17~92 cluster contribute to a robust inhibition ofRoraexpression. To test the functional relevance of miR-17~92-mediatedRorarepressionin vivo, we genetically limitedRorato one functional allele by intercrossing SMARTA T17~92?/? andstaggerermice that carry a spontaneous mutant allele (RoraNone) that does not encode a functional RORalpha protein. Roraheterozygosity in 17~92?/? SM TFHcells restoredRoramRNA to the abundance observed in 17~92+/+SM TFHcells (Supplementary Fig. 8). Adoptive transfer of SMARTA 17~92?/? cells with subsequent LCMV infection led to increased CCR6 and IL-1R2 expression predominantly in TFHcells, confirming our previous results (Fig. 6c). In contrast, many fewer 17~92?/? RoraNoneSMARTA cells displayed increased CCR6 expression (Fig. 6c). Thus, limitingRorapartially restored proper regulation of CCR6 despite the absence of miR-17~92. Importantly, neither wild-type, 17~92?/? , nor 17~92?/? RoraNoneTFHcells showed differences in the expression of the closely related ROR family member RORgammat, which can also induce CCR6 expression (Fig. 6d). Microarray experiments also indicated no significant difference in the expression of RORgammat in control and 17~92?/? SMARTA TFHcells (data not shown). Thus, it is unlikely that RORgammat was the driving force behind the dysregulated gene signature of 17~92?/? TFHcells. IL-1R2 expression was not affected by limitingRora(Fig. 6c). However, the frequency of IL-22 producing SMARTA 17~92?/? RoraNonecells was also reduced by about half compared to SMARTA 17~92?/? cells (Fig. 6e). We conclude that miR-17~92 is required to directly repressRoraduring TFHdifferentiation in order to prevent subset-inappropriate gene expression. A better understanding of the genetic programs that regulate TFHcell differentiation and plasticity might lead to novel strategies for rational vaccine design and suppression of antibody-mediated autoimmune diseases. Major advances deciphering important roles for Bcl-6 and other protein-coding genes have been achieved in recent yearsNone. In contrast, very little is known about the role of miRNAs in TFHcell differentiation. We found that miRNAs are absolutely critical for TFHcell differentiation and function, and that the miR-17~92 cluster in particular is required for robust TFHresponses in a T cell-intrinsic manner. Those SM TFHcells that did develop in the absence of miR-17~92 failed to suppress the direct targetRoraand a suite of other TFHcell-inappropriate genes normally expressed in TH17 and TH22 cells. We conclude that miR-17~92 promotes TFHcell differentiation and maintains the fidelity of TFHcell identity by repressing non-TFHcell genes both directly and indirectly. Taken together with previous studies that demonstrated miR-17~92 regulation of T cell proliferation and survivalNone-None, our findings indicate that miR-17~92 constitutes a central coordinator of activated T cell fate decisions. The global role of miRNAs in TFHcell responses has been difficult to study because of the strong defects in T cell survival and proliferation in miRNA-deficient T cells. We overcame this roadblock using adoptive transfer of OVA-specific OT-II TCR transgenic T cells and intravital dye dilution to analyze the early stages of TFHdifferentiation in miRNA-sufficient and miRNA-deficient cells that had survived and divided the same number of timesin vivo. This approach revealed that miRNAs are essential for the earliest steps in TFHcell differentiation, including upregulation of Bcl-6 and CXCR5, downregulation of CCR7, and migration to sites of interaction with B cells in secondary lymphoid organs. These findings contrast sharply with the requirement for miRNAs to restrain TH1 differentiationNone,None, but are reminiscent of the requirement for miRNAs in supporting Treg differentiation and functionNone-None. The same transfer system revealed that miR-17~92 regulates multiple T cell behaviors that are important for mounting effective humoral immune responses. miR-17~92 had a surprisingly small effect on the proliferation of OT-II T cellsin vivo, but it was clearly required for optimal TFHcell differentiation. Increased expression ofPten, a known direct target of miR-17~92 and regulator of TFHcell responsesNone,None, partially accounted for defective TFHcell generation during the earliest cell divisions. Interestingly, CD28 costimulation represses PTENNoneand induces miR-17~92 expression in activated T cellsNone(D.d.K., J.A.B. and L.T.J., unpublished observations). We speculate that the required role of CD28 costimulation in TFHcell differentiationNonemay be mediated in part by miR-17~92 induction and subsequent PTEN downregulation. However, the effect ofPtenregulation was barely detectable in this system, indicating important roles for other direct targets of miR-17~92. Cell proliferation and the early wave of Bcl-6 induction that occurs in all activated T cellsNonewas intact in the absence of miR-17~92. These observations indicated that some of the relevant targets must affect TFHcell differentiation per se rather than T cell activation in general. In contrast, the more prominent second phase of Bcl-6 upregulation characteristic of TFHcells was severely blunted, and CXCR5 induction was almost completely abrogated. We also observed specific effects on TFHcell differentiation that could be clearly distinguished from general activation defects in LCMV infection. 17~92?/? SM TFHcells acquired an inappropriate gene expression program reminiscent of TH17 or TH22 cellsNone,None, including upregulation of RORalpha, CCR6, components of the IL-1 pathway (IL-1R1, IL-1R2), and inducible production of IL-22. TH17 and TH22 cells are closely related THsubsets that display many shared (for example, CCR6 expression) but also distinct featuresNone,None. However, T17~92?/? TFHcells did not convert into RORgammat+and IL-17-producing TH17 cells, nor did they become proper TH22 cells. Instead, they maintained expression of the TFHcell program, including the markers CXCR5, Bcl-6, and PD-1, and became a hybrid cell type with molecular features of more than one helper T cell subset. We conclude that TFHcells require miR-17~92 to repress inappropriate non-TFHgene expression programs. This requirement was selective for TFHcells, since CCR6 and IL-1R2 expression were much less affected in non-TFHcells (which are mostly TH1 cells) in the same infected spleens. We noted that miR-17~92 deficiency did not affect the frequency of SMARTA TFHcells, but did significantly reduce the total number of both TFHcells and TH1 cells in infected spleens. Thus LCMV, which induces extremely robust T cell expansion, revealed the defect inin vivoantigen-driven helper T cell proliferation that was predicted by previousin vitrostudiesNone,None, whereas the slower proliferating OT-II transgenic T cells manifested a more selective defect in TFHcell differentiation. Polyclonal responses in T17~92?/? mice also differed in the magnitude of the defect in the frequency and number of TFHcells (more affected in LCMV infection) and GC B cells (more affected in OVA immunization). Compromised function of CD8+T cells, which also lack miR-17~92 in these mice, may indirectly affect these responses, particularly in the case of LCMV infectionNone. CD4+T helper cell "plasticity" has garnered a lot of attention in recent years. Current models of T cell differentiation suggest that cell identity is less rigid than previously thoughtNone. Although Bcl-6 has been identified as a subset-defining transcription factor required for TFHcell differentiationNone-None, it remains controversial whether or not TFHcells represent a stable cell lineageNone. A recent model suggests that initial helper T cell differentiation proceeds via a Bcl-6+pre-T helper cell stage with concomitant expression of T-bet, GATA3 and/or RORgammatNone. According to this model, TH1, TH2, or TH17 differentiation cues downregulate Bcl-6 and further upregulate the lineage-defining factors, increased Bcl-6 expression and suppression of RORgammat, GATA3 and T-bet yields TFHcells. Since concomitant expression of competing transcription programs are common, repression of genes leading to alternative cell fates is an important requirement during T cell differentiationNone,None. Individual miRNAs can be powerful enough to shift a cell's transcriptome to that of a different cell typeNone, and they maintain the fidelity of cell-type specific transcriptomes by repressing genetic programs of other cell lineagesNone. We previously reported that miRNA deficiency induces proinflammatory cytokine secretion in Treg even though they continue to express Foxp3 (ref. None). miR-10a may restrict the plasticity of several subsets of helper T cells, including both Treg and TFHcells, and may influence TH17 differentiationNone,None. miR-29 prevents aberrant activation of the TH1 program by repressing both T-bet and its homolog Eomesodermin, which is usually not expressed in CD4+T cellsNone. In this study, we found that all four miRNA families in the miR-17~92 cluster targetRorato prevent the expression of CCR6 and other genes associated with TH17 or TH22 cells. Thus, a paradigm is emerging in which miRNAs help to define and maintain cell identity by repressing alternative gene expression programs, effectively limiting the plasticity of differentiating T cells. Interestingly, while a dichotomy between TFHand TH17 differentiation pathways has been proposedNone, TH17 cells can acquire a TFHphenotype under certain conditions in Peyer's patchesNone. The unexpected identification of RORalpha as a direct miR-17~92 target and functionally relevant contributor to TFH-inappropriate gene expression suggests that differentiating (pre-)TFHcells receive signals that induceRoratranscription, but that miR-17~92 renders that induction inconsequential. Future studies will be needed to identify those signals and to test whether miR-17~92 controls RORalpha expression in other cell types as well. A "lineage-defining" transcription factor has not been identified for TH22 cells but we note that despite their similarity to TH17 cells expression of RORgammat is not required for human TH22 cellsNone. In line with this, RORgammat expression was not significantly affected in the hybrid TFH/TH17/TH22 signature we found in 17~92?/? SM TFHcells. Moreover, TH17 cell heterogeneity poses specific challenges and certain types of TH17 cells might be more closely related to TH22 cells than conventional TH17 cellsNone. Thus, the distinct functions of RORalpha and RORgammat in differentiating T cells might need to be revisited. In addition, it remains uncertain whether altered migration, response to cytokines, or some other trait of RORalpha expressing cells limits TFHdifferentiation and functionin vivo. Future studies are required to define miR-17~92 function in early TFHcell fate determination and to dissect cell intrinsic effects on the molecular program from secondary effects due to altered abilities to sense the environment. Finally, it is important to note that our data demonstrate that regulation of RORalpha only partially explains the hybrid gene expression profile in miR-17~92-deficient TFHcells. Additional direct targets relevant to this phenotype must exist and remain to be discovered. Nevertheless, our findings indicate that miR-17~92 and Bcl-6 cooperate to imprint and protect the identity of developing TFHcells by repressing differentiation into alternate T cell subsets. TCR-transgenic (tg) OT-II (004194), floxed miR-17~92 (008458), Rosa26-miR-17~92 tg (008517), and heterozygousRorasg(002651) mice were purchased from The Jackson Laboratory (JAX). CD4-Cre mice (4196) were obtained from Taconic. OT-II and SMARTANonemice were crossed with B6.SJL-Ptprca Pepcb/BoyJ mice (002014) to obtain offspring with congenic CD45 alleles. FloxedDgcr8(ref. None) mice were kindly provided by R. Blelloch. C57BL/6 (JAX) or congenic B6-LY5.2/Cr (National Cancer Institute) mice were used as recipients. FloxedPtenmice have been described beforeNone. All experiments were done according to the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee guidelines of the University of California, San Francisco. OT-II and SMARTA cells were pre-enriched from spleens and lymph nodes (LNs) with the CD4+negative isolation kit (Invitrogen) and naive T cells (CD4+CD8-CD25-CD44lowCD62Lhi) were further purified on a FACS Aria II cell sorter (BD Biosciences). To obtain trueDgcr8-deficient OT-II cells, naive cells were additionally sorted according to YFP expression driven by a Rosa26-YFP reporter allele, in which efficient excision of a floxed stop cassette by the CD4-Cre activity results in a bright YFP signal. For cell proliferation experiments, naive T cells were labeled with 5 uM CellTrace Violet (Invitrogen) as described beforeNone. NP18-OVA (Biosearch Technologies) was mixed with Imject Alum (Pierce) and 5 ug NP18-OVA were injected s.c. into each hind footpad or 50 ug s.c. in the base of tail and flank. In some experiments, mice were infected i.p. with 2*10NonePFU lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (Armstrong strain). Spleen and LN cells were gently disrupted between the frosted ends of microscope slides and single-cell suspensions were filtered through fine mesh. Antibodies were purchased from eBioscience, BD Biosciences, or Biolegend: CD4 (clone RM4-5), CD8alpha (53-6.7), CD19 (1D3), CD25 (PC61.5), CD45.1 (A20), CD45.2 (104), CD44 (IM7), CD62L (MEL-14), CCR6 (140706), B220 (RA3-6B2), FAS (Jo2), GL-7, IgD (11-26c), IL-17A (eBio17B7), IL1R2 (4E2), IL-22 (1H8PWSR), PD-1 (J43 or RMP1-30). Unspecific binding was blocked with anti-CD16/CD32 plus 2% normal mouse/rat serum. Biotinylated anti-CXCR5 (clone 2G8, BD Biosciences) was visualized with streptavidin-allophycocyanin. Staining with biotinylated anti-CCR7 (clone 4B12, eBioscience) was performed for 30 min at 37 degrees C, followed by regular surface staining including streptavidin-allophycocyanin at 4 degrees C. The anti-Bcl-6 mAb (clone K112-91), anti-PTEN mAb (clone A2B1), and anti-RORgammat mAb (clone Q31-378) were from BD Biosciences. Intracellular Bcl-6 staining was performed with the Foxp3 Staining Set (eBioscience). Cytofix Fixation Buffer and Perm Buffer III (BD) were used for intracellular PTEN staining. For intracellular cytokine staining, LN cells were stimulated with PMA/ionomycin for 4h, with the addition of Brefeldin A for the last 2h. Cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde followed by permeabilization with saponin (Sigma-Aldrich). Human IL-21R-Fc chimera (R D Systems) was revealed with Phycoerythrin-labeled Fc-specific anti-human IgG F(ab')2 fragments (Jackson ImmunoResearch). Samples were acquired on a LSR II cytometer (BD Biosciences) and analyzed with FlowJo software (Tree Star), gating out doublets as well as non-T or non-B cells, where appropriate, in a dump channel. Dead cells were excluded with 7-aminoactinomycin D (eBioscience) or Fixable Viability Dye eFluor780 (eBioscience). Naive T cells from control and CD4-Cre+miR17~92fl/flmice were activatedin vitrowith plate-bound anti-CD3 (clone 2C11)/anti-CD28 (PV1) for 48 h and 72 h. CFSE-labeling was performed as describedNone. Proliferation analysis was performed using the proliferation analysis function in FlowJo for Mac V9.2 and higher. To normalize for interexperimental differences we normalized all data to the control in the first experiment (defined as a proliferative index of 1). RNA extraction and miRNA qPCR was performed as described beforeNone. Naive SMARTA cells were purified by flow cytometry from T17~92+/+control or T17~92?/? donor mice and adoptively transferred into wild-type mice. Recipients were infected i.p. with LCMV Armstrong and spleens were dissected 5.5 days later. Spleen cells were pooled for each condition (n= 3-5 mice) and CD4+T cells were enriched with the CD4+negative isolation kit (Invitrogen) and congenically marked SMARTA TFHcells (7AAD-CD4+CD8-CD19-CXCR5hiPD-1hi) were sorted directly into Trizol LS reagent and stored at -80 degrees C until further processing. RNA from four independent experiments was purified using RNeasy columns (Qiagen). Sample preparation, labeling, and array hybridizations were performed according to standard protocols from the UCSF Shared Microarray Core Facilities and Agilent Technologies (http://www.arrays.ucsf.eduandhttp://www.agilent.com). Total RNA quality was assessed using a Pico Chip on an Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies). RNA was amplified using the Sigma whole transcriptome amplification kits following the manufacturer's protocol (Sigma-Aldrich), and subsequent Cy3-CTP labeling was performed using NimbleGen one-color labeling kits (Roche-NimbleGen Inc,). Labeled Cy3-cDNA was assessed using the Nanodrop ND-8000 (Nanodrop Technologies, Inc.), and equal amounts of Cy3 labeled target were hybridized to Agilent whole mouse genome 8*60K in-jet arrays. Hybridizations were performed for 17h, according to the manufacturer's protocol. Arrays were scanned using the Agilent microarray scanner and raw signal intensities were extracted with Feature Extraction v10.6 software. Two different 3' UTR constructs ofRorawere cloned into the psiCHECK-2 luciferase reporter construct (Promega) as described inSupplementary Fig. 7. Primer sequences were: P1 F: 5'-TAGTAGCTCGAGATGTCGCGCCCGAGCACTTC-3'; P1 R: 5'-TAGTAGGCGGCCGCAAACAGCAGCATAAATACCTCCCAACG-3'; P2 F: 5'-TAGTAGCTCGAGCCCCCAAAGTCTTTAACATCCTGA-3'; P2 R: 5'-TAGTAGGCGGCCGCAGTCAACCATAAGGTGCTTATTACTATTA-3'.) T cell transfections and luciferase assays were performed as described beforeNone. CD4+T cells from spleen and lymph nodes were isolated by magnetic bead selection (Dynal) and stimulated with anti-CD3 and anti-CD28. Cells were transfected with the Neon electroporation transfection system (Invitrogen). miRIDIAN miRNA mimics (miR-17, miR-18a, miR-19a, miR-92a) and controls were from Dharmacon. Activated CD4+T cells were transfected with reporter constructs and luciferase activity was measured 24 h after transfection with the Dual Luciferase Reporter Assay System (Promega) and a FLUOstar Optima plate-reader (BMG Labtech). 96-well half-area plates (Costar) were coated overnight with 10 ug/ml NP24-BSA (Biosearch Technologies) in PBS at 4 degrees C. Plates were blocked with 1% BSA in PBS and serial dilutions of serum were incubated at 21 degrees C Horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated anti-mouse IgG1-specific antibodies (Southern Biotech) and Super AquaBlue ELISA Substrate (eBioscience) were used as detection reagents. Absorbance was measured at 410 nm with a FLUOstar Optima plate-reader (BMG Labtech). Absolute values were calculated according to reference sera derived from hyper-immunized mice and are expressed in arbitrary units (AU). For LCMV-specific antibody measurements, plates were coated with LCMV-infected BHK lysate. After blocking with 10% FBS in PBS, serially diluted serum was added. Anti-mouse IgG-HRP was used as detection antibody (Southern Biotech) with 3,3',5,5'-tetramethylbenzidine as substrate. Ab titers were determined as the reciprocal of the dilution that gave an OD value (450 nm) reading of more than 2-fold above that of naive control sera. Draining popliteal LNs were dissected, embedded in Tissue-Tek O.C.T compound (Sakura Finetek), and flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen. Frozen tissues were stored at -80 degrees C until further processing. Cryosections (7 um) were air-dried for 1h before and after fixation in cold acetone for 10 min, and then were rehydrated in 0.1% BSA containing Tris-buffered saline (TBS pH 7.6) for 10 min. Slides were stained for 3 h at 20-25 degrees C in a humidified chamber in TBS containing 0.1% BSA, 1% normal mouse serum and 1% normal rat serum with a mixture of the following diluted primary antibodies: CD45.2 FITC (Biolegend), goat anti-mouse IgD (Cedarlane labs). After washing for 5 min in TBS, slides were incubated for 1h with cocktails of the following secondary reagents (all from Jackson Immunoresearch) in TBS/0.1% BSA: mouse anti-FITC alkaline phosphatase (AP), donkey anti-goat horse radish peroxidase (HRP), streptavidin HRP. Enzyme conjugates were developed with DAB and Fast-blue (both from Sigma-Aldrich). Data were analyzed with Prism 5 (GraphPad Software). The two-tailed non-parametric Mann-Whitney test was used to compare two unpaired groups. The non-parametric Kruskal-Wallis test was used to compare three or more unpaired groups, followed by Dunn's post test to calculatePvalues for each group. Two-way ANOVA was used together with Bonferroni post tests to compare replicates in each cell division of CTV-labeled OT-II cells. Graphs show the mean +/- SEM. *,P less than 0.05; **,P less than 0.01; ***,P less than 0.001.