Binding sites for the transcriptional regulatory factor nuclear factor kappa-B (NF-kappaB) are found in the promoters of many immunoregulatory genes whose expression plays a central role in acute inflammation and critical illness [1,2]. For example, NF-kappaB is involved in the transcription of genes encoding proinflammatory cytokines, such as IL-8 and TNF-alpha, adhesion molecules, including intracellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM-1), molecules involved in regulation of apoptosis, such as B cell lymphoma 2 (Bcl-2), and growth factors, such as erythropoietin. Activation of NF-kappaB, with increased translocation from the cytoplasm to the nucleus, is associated with a higher likelihood of mortality in patients with sepsis and acute lung injury [3,4]. Because of the association between enhanced activation of NF-kappaB and poor outcomes in patients with sepsis and acute lung injury, inhibition of NF-kappaB has been hypothesized to be beneficial in critical illnesses in which an overly exuberant inflammatory response plays a major role. In preclinical models of sepsis and acute lung injury, and particularly those involving endotoxemia or other insults associated with rapid and large increases in pro-inflammatory cytokines and other mediators, suppression of NF-kappaB activation does indeed result in improved survival [5-7]. However, the benefits of inhibiting NF-kappaB in more chronic models of critical illness, such as that associated with pneumonia, is less clear. For example, transgenic mice lacking the RelA subunit of NF-kappaB demon strate decreased cytokine expression, alveolar neutrophil emigration, and lung bacterial killing during pneumococcal pneumonia [8]. Similarly, in mice withKlebsiella-induced pneumonia, inhibition of NF-kappaB activation through elimination of the Toll-like receptor adapter protein MyD88 resulted in diminished neutrophil influx into the lungs as well as greater numbers of bacteria in the lungs and enhanced systemic enhanced dissemination ofKlebsiella [9]. InPseudomonas aeruginosa pneumonia, transgenic mice with enhanced NF-kappaB activation showed greater expression of pro inflammatory chemokines, neutrophil influx and bacterial clearance in the lungs, and improved survival. In contrast, mice with diminished NF-kappaB activation in epithelial cells showed impaired responses toP. aeruginosa infection, with higher bacterial colony counts in the lungs and decreased neutrophilic lung inflammation [10]. Devaney and colleagues [1] now present confirmatory evidence that while inhibition of NF-kappaB early in severe pneumonia diminishes lung injury and improves survival, suppression of NF-kappaB activation in less severe and more chronic pneumonia results in greater pulmonary injury and increased numbers of bacteria in the lungs. In this study, suppression of NF-kappaB activation was accomplished through using pulmonary gene therapy with adenoassociated virus (AAV) vectors encoding the inhibitor of kappa B alpha (IkappaBalpha) and resulting in overexpression of IkappaBalpha, which diminishes cytoplasmic to nuclear trans location of NF-kappaB. This approach is similar to that used in studies previously reported by Sadikot and colleagues [11,12], in which inhibition of NF-kappaB was achieved using an adenoviral vector expressing a dominant negative form of IkappaBalpha. Similar to the results in the study of Devaney and colleagues, Sadikot and colleagues found that inhibition of NF-kappaB resulted in diminished bacterial clearance and inflammatory response in the lungs duringP. aeruginosa pneumonia. The acute pneumonia model used by Devaney and colleagues involves exposure of the lungs to high numbers (1 * 1011) ofEscherichia coli. This model results in the rapid onset of pulmonary inflammation, with most animals dying within 4 hours, and resembles the time course and pathophysiologic and immunologic responses found with intratracheal instillation of lipopolysaccharide. In this acute and highly lethal model of pulmonary inflammation, IkappaBalpha improved survival. In contrast, in a chronic model of pneumonia, induced by intratracheal injection of 20-fold fewerE. coli (5 * 109) than with the conditions for acute pneumonia, treatment of mice with the AAV-IkappaBalpha construct was associated with greater pulmonary inflammation, as shown by increased levels of the proinflammatory cytokines IL-1beta and TNF-alpha, worse histologic evidence of lung injury, and higher bacterial numbers in the lungs. What are the implications of these studies that investigated the role of NF-kappaB activation in pneumonia? Clearly, they demonstrate the importance of a dysregulated, overly intense inflammatory response in inducing pulmonary injury during the early stages of massive bacterial exposure. In addition, these experiments show that an intact inflammatory response, in which NF-kappaB plays a major role, is required for appropriate host defense against the later stages of bacterial pneumonia. Such results are consistent with older studies showing that immunosuppression, such as that achieved by corticosteroids [13] or by blockade of proinflammatory mediators, including inhibition of TNF-alpha [14] or CXC chemokines [15], resulted in increased numbers of bacteria in the lungs and worse outcome from pneumonia. In addition, the experiments reported by Devaney and colleagues and others highlight the danger of broadly inhibiting inflammatory responses in chronic infective states, such as that associated with pneumonia. Identification of patients at high risk of death from inflammation-induced organ dysfunction as well as titration of inflammation in such patients, in terms of both timing of interventions aimed at modulating the inflammatory process and the targeting of specific proinflammatory mediators, will be essential in improving outcome from life-threatening infectious processes associated with critical illness. AAV: adeno-associated virus; IkappaBalpha: inhibitor of kappa B alpha; IL: interleukin; NF-kappaB: nuclear factor kappa-B; TNF: tumor necrosis factor alpha. The author declares that they have no competing interests.