A subset of apparently healthy obese subjects - known as metabolically healthy obese (MHO) - does not display the metabolic abnormalities associated with obesity (1,2). MHO have high levels of insulin sensitivity, low prevalence of hypertension, and a favorable lipid and inflammatory profile (3-5). MHO account for 9-41% of the obese population depending on the definition of metabolic health (6). Despite this favorable metabolic profile, MHO have elevated mortality and cardiovascular disease (CVD) risk compared to metabolically healthy lean (MHL) subjects and similar mortality risk compared to metabolically abnormal obese (MAO) subjects (6,7). Importantly, limited information is available on potentially distinct adipose tissue phenotypes across these sub-groups. Increased visceral adipose tissue (VAT) portends higher cardiometabolic risk compared to expansion of subcutaneous adipose tissue (SAT) (8). Volumes of abdominal fat depots andin vivoadipose tissue glucose uptake can be measured using 18-fluorodeoxy-glucose positron emission tomography CT (FDG-PET/CT). Prior studies in fasting subjects have shown higher VAT FDG uptake compared to SAT (9), and markedly decreased VAT and SAT glucose uptake during insulin stimulation in insulin-resistant obese subjects compared to nonobese subjects (10). Our goal was to measure FDG uptake in VAT and SAT of MHO and MAO, with MHL subjects as a reference. Given that MHO have increased cardiovascular risk despite a favorable metabolic profile, we hypothesized MHO and MAO subjects would display similar FDG uptake in abdominal adipose tissue. This study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of Partners HealthCare, Inc. with exemption for individual informed consent. We retrospectively identified consecutive FDG- PET/CT examinations of adults (age greater than =18 years) obtained for clinical purposes (e.g., cancer follow-up and benign etiologies) between August 2009 and October 2013. Inclusion criteria were: fasting glucose preceding FDG-PET/CT; blood pressure and serum lipids measured within 12 months of FDG-PET/CT; and no malignancy at imaging. We excluded subjects with: abdominal pathology, radiation therapy or surgery; and with insufficient data to determine metabolic syndrome by the National Cholesterol Education Program (NCEP ATP III) criteria (11). Systolic (SBP) and diastolic blood pressure (DBP), triglycerides, total, LDL-, and HDL- cholesterol within 12 months of imaging, and fasting glucose were obtained from medical records. Waist circumference was measured using CT as described below. Metabolic syndrome was confirmed by three or more NCEP ATP III criteria (11). Those without metabolic syndrome were considered metabolically healthy. Obesity was defined by BMI (in kg/m2) cut-offs (12), with lean considered 28 (males) and 24 (females), and obese considered =28 (males) and =24 (females). FDG-PET/CT was obtained after a 6-hour fast on an integrated scanner (Siemens, Erlangen, Germany). 18VAT and SAT volumes (cm3) were calculated from L1 through L5 using semi-automated tracings (TeraRecon, San Mateo, CA). Whole-body volumes of fat free tissue (FFT, cm3), fat (cm3), and %-fat were calculated by multiplying fat areas by slice thickness (5 mm) from slices through orbits, humeral heads, L4, femoral heads, and proximal thighs. PET/CT images were fused using OsiriX software (http://www.osirix-viewer.com) and FDG uptake was measured in regions of interest (ROI) within largest cross-section of omental VAT, posterolateral SAT and psoas muscle. ROIs yielded mean standardized uptake values (SUV), defined as activity per milliliter of tissue divided by injected dose in megabecquerels per gram of body weight. Multiple pair comparisons between groups were performed with and without adjustment for either age and gender, fasting glucose, or fasting glucose and liver density using the Tukey- Kramer test. Associations were examined using Spearman's correlation. The Wilcoxon test compared SUV of VAT versus SAT. Multivariate modeling adjusted for age and gender examined correlations between VAT and SAT FDG uptake with body composition. Analyses were performed using JMP 11 (SAS, Cary, NC). 0.05 indicated statistical significance. We identified 191 subjects of which 45 were excluded due to prior abdominal surgery and 5 due to abdominal pathology. The final cohort comprised 141 subjects, with characteristics detailed inTable 1. The mean delay between FDG injection and imaging was 65+/-16 minutes and similar between groups (P greater than 0.1). MHO and MAO had similar age, gender, BMI, blood pressure, total- and LDL- cholesterol. MAO subjects had higher fasting glucose and serum triglycerides, and lower HDL- cholesterol (allP less than 0.05). MAO had higher abdominal circumference (P=0.01) and VAT volume (P less than 0.0001) compared to MHO, despite similar BMI and SAT volume (P=0.56). Whole-body fat and %fat were higher (P less than 0.0001) and similar (P greater than 0.3) in MHO and MAO compared to MHL. VAT FDG uptake in MHO and MAO was similar (P=0.74) but significantly lower than MHL (P less than 0.01;P less than 0.01 after adjustments). SAT FDG uptake was similar across all groups (P greater than 0.2;P greater than 0.1 after adjustments) (Figure 1). In all groups, FDG uptake in VAT was higher than SAT (P less than 0.0001). Liver density was similar in MHL and MHO (P=0.66), both higher than MAO (P less than 0.05), suggesting increased fat content in MAO. Muscle FDG uptake was similar in MHO and MAO (P=0.38), with both higher compared to MHL (P less than 0.02). VAT FDG uptake was more broadly negatively associated with whole-body adiposity across subgroups, with most associations being independent of age and gender (Table 2). In all subjects, VAT and SAT FDG uptake was positively associated with liver density (Table 2), and VAT (r=-0.47) and SAT (r=-0.30) volume were negatively associated with liver density (P less than 0.001). MHO and MAO had similar VAT FDG uptake that was lower compared to MHL, suggesting MHO may present abnormal adipose glucose handling despite a favorable metabolic profile. Our data also suggest reduced VAT FDG uptake - possibly due to insulin-resistant adipocytes - may outweigh uptake increase from higher macrophage burden in obesity (9,10). Lower VAT FDG activity in MHO and MAO could also reflect abnormal perfusion, vascular function and capillary density, which are impaired in obesity (13,14). Although the mechanism of lower VAT FDG activity cannot be determined in our cohort, abnormal glucose uptake may occur in MHO and MAO irrespective of metabolic syndrome being present. In insulin-stimulated obese versus nonobese subjects, Virtanen et al. (10) showed marked decrease in VAT, SAT, muscle, and whole-body glucose uptake. In contrast, Christen et al. (9) found similar VAT and SAT FDG uptake in fasting lean versus obese subjects. In our study, although VAT FDG uptake was lower in obese, SAT FDG uptake was similar across subgroups likely from lower glucose uptake during fasting. Regarding muscle FDG uptake, SUV were higher in MHO and MAO independent of fasting glucose. Interestingly, although muscle (but not adipose tissue) SUV may mildly increase during hyperglycemia (15), MHO were normoglycemic similar to MHL. While our findings suggest fasting MHO may have altered VAT and muscle glucose uptake, further examination under steady-state conditions with dynamic PET are warranted to precisely determine glucose flux. As previously shown, VAT volume was higher in MAO followed by MHO (16-18), and both groups had similar and elevated SAT and whole-body %fat compared to MHL (18). Although SAT metabolic activity was lower than VAT as in prior studies (9,10), the more extensive SAT and whole-body fat depots have a greater impact in whole-body glucose metabolism (10) with overall adipose tissue mass itself playing a more important role than metabolic activity alone. Nonetheless, VAT FDG uptake in our fasting cohort was more strongly associated with whole-body adiposity supporting a link between generalized adipose expansion and VAT dysfunction. An interesting finding was the positive association between VAT and SAT FDG uptake with liver density in all subjects, suggesting a connection between lower adipose metabolic activity with liver fat accumulation. As expected, VAT volume more strongly correlated with lower liver density (i.e., more liver fat). However, MHL and MHO had similar liver density while MAO had highest liver fat. Although concordant with a prior study (18), this contrasts with reported higher prevalence of fatty liver in MHO that partially explained increased risk of type 2 diabetes (19). Our results support that MHO may be heterogeneous regarding body composition and insulin sensitivity, with ectopic fat accumulation and lack of physical activity having potential roles in increasing risk of diabetes, CVD and mortality (6,19,20). Limitations of this study include its retrospective design and lack of fasting insulin, indices of physical activity, inflammation and aerobic fitness. Our FDG uptake measurements were not performed under steady-state conditions, which are best suited to examine glucose tissue dynamics. Strengths of our study include a large number of subjects examined at a single center and the ability to compare obese subgroups to MHL subjects, with imaging obtained at similar timeframes after FDG administration. In conclusion, MHO and MAO had similar VAT FDG uptake that was lower compared to MHL, suggesting MHO may present VAT dysfunction that warrants further characterization.