The nitrile functional group is prevalent in organic materials,Nonepolymers,Nonedyes,Nonepesticides,Nonenatural products,Noneand pharmaceuticals. NoneThe compact nature of the nitrile moiety, as well as its hydrogen bond accepting ability, metabolic stabilityin vivostudies, and use as a hydroxyl or carboxyl isostere has made it an important functional group in medicinal chemistry research. NoneCurrently, there are over 30 approved drugs along with 20 additional leads in late-stage clinical trials that possess one or more nitrile substituents. These nitrile-containing bioactive molecules have been shown to treat a broad spectrum of ailments, such as depression, breast cancer, anti-HIV, and Parkinson's disease. NoneNitriles are also an excellent synthetic handle to install a variety of functional groups such as amides, ketones, amines, and alcohols. Palladium-catalyzed cross coupling of aryl halides and metallo-nucleophiles have seen tremendous advances over the last 30 years. NoneIn 1973, Takagi and co-workers reported the first palladium-catalyzed cyanation of aryl halides and KCN. NoneThis report included only a few substrates, and high temperatures (140 degrees C) were needed to achieve high conversion. NoneSince this seminal report, there have been numerous advances by Beller,NoneGrushin,Noneour group,Noneand othersNone(Scheme1, top). An interesting study by Grushin elucidated the challenges associated with the catalytic palladium cyanation of aryl halides. NoneThe high binding affinity and pi-accepting nature of cyanide make it an excellent ligand for palladium. Therefore, complete solubilization of the nucleophilic cyanide source leads to rapid ligand displacement to form inactive off-cycle species, thus inhibiting product formation. Many have circumvented these undesired pathways by using biphasic solvent mixtures or solvents in which the cyanide source is sparingly soluble in the reaction mixture. None,None,None,None,NoneThese approaches have led to improvements in the palladium-catalyzed cyanation both in terms of substrate scope and reproducibility. NoneHowever, these methods usually require grinding of the cyanide source to maintain a uniform particle size and high reaction temperatures (50-80 degrees C) to facilitate efficient and reproducible reactions for aryl and heteroaryl substrates. NonePrevious stoichiometric studies in the palladium-catalyzed cyanation have shown that the oxidative addition, transmetalation, and reductive elimination steps occur at or below 40 degrees C.None,NoneDespite these findings a substoichiometric method for a general room temperature palladium-catalyzed cyanation has not been reported. NoneA mild palladium-catalyzed cyanation would allow safer reaction conditions, cleaner reaction profiles, and an expanded substrate scope. In this study, we disclose a general and efficient low temperature (rt to 40 degrees C) palladium-catalyzed cross coupling of (hetero)aryl halides and triflates with Zn(CN)2in aqueous media (Scheme1, bottom). NoneThis reaction does not require vigorous drying of the glassware or grinding of the Zn(CN)2and is amenable to a broad range of aryl halides/triflates, five- and six-membered heterocycles, and natural product derivatves. This method was directly utilized for the late-stage cyanation and synthesis of the non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor, lersivirine. NoneWe began the examination of this room-temperature palladium-catalyzed cyanation by using our third-generation palladacycle precatalyst (P1-P3; Scheme2) as the palladium source. NoneOur initial experiments focused on the cyanation of ethyl 4-chlorobenzoate (2a) with Zn(CN)2(Table1). We chose zinc cyanide as the nucleophile since it is commercially available, inexpensive, and significantly less toxic than the representative potassium and sodium salts. A preliminary solvent screen showed that only when conducting the reaction in THF was there any appreciable amount of product. Investigation of a qualified catalytic base to activate the precatalysts showed that as the pKaof the base increased, the corresponding conversion to the aryl nitrile decreased (entries 1-5), with potassiumtert-butoxide resulting in no conversion (entry 6). Examination of this reaction in the absence of base resulted in the highest level of conversion (entry 7). Presumably, cyanide acts as the ideal base to activate the precatalyst to form the Pd(0).L species. Exploration of other precatalysts with different ligands did not provide any higher levels of conversion. NoneTo improve the rate of transmetalation of cyanide we examined a H2O/THF solvent mixture. The assumption was that the Zn(CN)2would be solubilized in the aqueous phase and a slow diffusion of the cyanide to the organic phase would allow a moderate rate of transmetalation without deactivation of the palladium catalyst. Ranges of different ratios of H2O/THF mixtures were surveyed (entry 8-14). Higher levels of conversion were observed when the percentage of water in the THF/H2O mixture was increased. It was eventually determined that 5:1 H2O/THF solvent allowed full conversion of aryl chloride2aand an 89% isolated yield of nitrile3a(entry 12). Further exploration of the reaction revealed that running this reaction with just precatalystP1and no additional ligand furnished nitrile3ain 93% isolated yield (entry 15). It is interesting to point out that the substitution on the phosphine was key for the overall conversion. Evaluation of the smaller dicyclohexyl- or larger adamantyl-XPhos ligand systems resulted in no reaction (entries 16 and 17). We hypothesize that the steric environment of thetert-butyl phosphine prevents displacement of the ligand by cyanide during the course of the reaction, thus allowing efficient cross-coupling without poisoning of the palladium catalyst. Reaction conditions: ethyl 4-chlorobenzoate (0.2 mmol), Zn(CN)2(0.66 equiv),P1(0.004 mmol),L1(0.004 mmol), base (0.02 mmol), solvent (1 mL). Percent conversion determined by1H NMR (500 MHz) with Cl2CHCHCl2as an internal standard. Isolated yield in parentheses. Reaction run without additional 2 mol % ofL1and at (1.0 mmol scale). Reaction run withP2as the catalyst. Reaction run withP3as the catalyst. With the optimized reaction conditions in hand, we explored the substrate scope for this palladium-catalyzed cyanation (Scheme3). NoneAryl bromides with electron-withdrawing substitution were first examined. Aldehyde (3b), ketone (3c), and nitrile (3d) functional groups were readily tolerated on the aryl halide. No benzoin products were observed with thep-aldehyde substrate (3b), even though cyanide is known to catalyze the benzoin reaction. Use of 2-fluoro-4-nitrobromobenzene furnished only the mononitrile compound (3e), implying that nucleophilic aromatic substitution is not a dominant pathway in this protocol at 40 degrees C.Isolated yields (average of two runs) are shown. Reaction conditions: aryl halide (1.0 mmol), ZnCN2(0.66 equiv),P1(0.02-0.05 mmol), THF/H2O [(1:5), 3.00 mL], 18 h.The corresponding aryl chloride was used as the starting material. Reactions were run at 40 degrees C.Reaction run on a 10.0 mmol scale of the aryl bromide. Reaction run on a 0.5 mmol scale of aryl bromide (triflate) at 0.2 M concentration. Isolated as the BF3K salt; yield is over the two steps. The corresponding aryl trfilate was used as the starting material. We next surveyed aryl bromides with electron-donating functional groups. Methoxy (3fand3h) and dioxolane (3i) substitution was accommodated, providing the corresponding nitriles in excellent yields ( greater than =95% yield). Dioxolane3iis an aromatic nitrile that has reported micromolar ED50values for treatment againstErmatophagoides farinae,Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus, andTyrophagus putrescentiae. NoneOrtho-substitution (3g) was tolerated, although the reaction needed to be heated at 40 degrees C for optimal efficiency. Additionally, this method exhibits a high compatibility for substrates bearing free N-H and O-H functional groups, such as benzylic alcohol (3j), phenol (3k), and aniline (3l) moieties. Lastly, this protocol was compatible with a boronate ester (3 m), with homocoupling not observed. We then turned our attention toward the cyanation of heteroaryl bromides. Our method was found to be applicable toward a wide range of five- and six-membered heterocycles. The cyanation of five-membered heterocycles such as indoles (4a+4b), benzothiophene (4c), benzofuran (4d), thiophene (4e), unprotected thiazole (4f), pyrazole (4g), and pyrrole (4h) proceeded in excellent efficiency. Additionally, benzoxazole (4i), and unprotected benzothiazole (4j) furnished the corresponding aryl nitrile in excellent yield. Six-membered heterocycles, such as quinoline (4k), pyridine (4l), and pyrimidine (4m), also furnished the corresponding nitrile in excellent yield. To demonstate the robustness and generality of this method we then explored the cyanation of natural product derivatives. Cyanation of estrone, coumarin, and delta-tocopherol triflates furnished the corresponding cyanoaryl natural products in high yield (5a,5b, and5crespectively). The cross-coupling of Boc-protected 4-bromophenylalanine provided the nitrile derivative (5d) without removal of the protecting group or epimerization of the stereocenter. NoneFor this protocol to have direct application in pharmaceutical research, we need to demonstrate that these high yields can be reproduced at larger scale. With this aspect in mind, we examined the 10 mmol reaction for the cyanation of 4-bromobenzaldehyde, 4-bromoanisole, and unprotected 5-bromoindole. The corresponding nitriles (3b,3f, and4arespectively) were isolated in comparable yields without significant modification to the reaction conditions. NoneTo demonstrate the practicality and robustness of this method we applied this developed method toward the late-stage cyanation of a non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor, lersivirine (Scheme4). NoneReverse transcriptase inhibitors are an important class of antiretroviral drugs used in the treatment of HIV and other retroviruses. NonePrevious approaches to the synthesis of lersivirine involved the installation of the nitriles before the formation of the pyrazole. By using our procedure we were able to achieve the double cyanation of pyrazole9and formation of lersivirine in 88% yield at 40 degrees C.The relative rate for this room-temperature palladium-catalyzed cyanation was shown to follow the general trend reported by Hartwig,Nonein which aryl bromides withparaelectron-withdrawing substituents reacted at a slower rate than aryl rings with electron-donating substitution. This is consistent with the notion that the rate-determining step for this cyanation is the reductive elimination. In conclusion, we have developed a mild and practical palladium-catalyzed cyanation of (hetero)aryl halides and triflates. Previous reports have required higher temperatures and harsher conditions to achieve good catalytic activity for (hetero)aryl halides and triflates. To date, this method requires the lowest reported temperature to achieve a general catalytic palladium cyanation for hetero(aryl) bromides and triflates, including five-membered heterocycles. This reaction does not require grinding of the cyanide source, is run under aqueous conditions, and is easily set up. Finally, the utility of this cyanation was demonstrated by late-stage cyanation and synthesis of lersivirine. We anticipate that this palladium-catalyzed cyanation will be readily integrated into the fields of pharmaceutical and academic research.