Severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) is a fatal syndrome characterized by the absence of T cells and, in some molecular types, also of B or NK cells. None,NoneWithout immune reconstitution by hematopoietic stem cell transplantation or gene therapy, infants with SCID will die in the first two years of life. The use of HLA identical or haploidentical allogeneic bone marrow stem cell transplantation without pre-transplant chemotherapy or post-transplantation graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) prophylaxis has resulted in a survival rate at this institution of 94% if SCID patients are transplanted prior to 3.5 months of age. None-NoneHowever, the survival rate is significantly lower in those presenting later and, in some cases, patients fail to achieve immune reconstitution after one transplant. For such patients, "booster" transplants from the same or different donors have been given in efforts to achieve immune reconstitution. NoneMost of what has been reported about booster bone marrow transplantation has been in cancer patients. None-NoneBooster transplantations have been reported to improve T-cell immunity in SCID patientsNoneand in those with other primary immunodeficienciesNone,Nonewho had received a chemoablated first transplant. We report here the longterm outcomes in 49 SCID infants all of whom had initially received non-ablative T-cell-depleted haploidentical transplants and who subsequently received one or more non-ablative booster bone marrow transplants at this institution from 1982-2012 in efforts to improve their immune reconstitution. Forty-nine of 171 (28.7%) severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) patients who received non-ablative T cell-depleted haploidentical parental bone marrow transplants at this institution from 1982-2012 received 1 to 3 subsequent transplants from either the same (N=29) or a different (N=20) donor for a total of 81 additional transplants. All 49 patients met criteria of the World Health Organization for the diagnosis of SCID, and none had "leaky" SCID or Omenn syndrome. NoneThe age at diagnosis ranged from 0 days to 1.7 years. Comparisons of age at first transplant and survival in boosted and non-boosted patients are shown inTable 1according to the molecular type of SCID. The different donors included the other parent (N=17), an HLA-identical sibling (N=2), a grandmother (N=1) or matched unrelated cord blood donors (N=5). Two patients received booster transplants only in an attempt to reconstitute B-cell function. Conditioning was used only in patients who received matched unrelated donor cord blood transplants (N=5). Additionally, one patient received a thymus transplant between her second and third stem-cell transplants. Three patients received gene therapy elsewhere following three, four, and two transplants at this institution, respectively; this was unsuccessful in all cases. NoneOnly one of the 3 surviving boosted ADA-deficient patients is receiving PEG-ADA therapy, and all 3 of the deceased ones received it. Finally, four patients received additional matched unrelated donor transplants at other institutions following transplants at this institution and two subsequently died. Altogether, 18 boosted patients died. The control subjects for all immunological studies were healthy adult volunteers. The studies were approved by the Duke University Institutional Review Board, and written informed consent was obtained from the parents of all patients. Humoral and cellular immune studies were performed approximately every 3 weeks until T-cell function was established, then every three months for the next nine months, every six months for the following two years, then annually. Serum IgG, IgA, IgM and IgE were quantified by single radial diffusion or nephelometry. NoneAnti-diphtheria and anti-tetanus antibodies were determined by tanned cell hemagglutinationNoneor by an ELISA after standard vaccines had been administered, and isohemagglutinins were measured by a microtiter plate assay. Lymphocyte phenotypes were determined by immunofluorescent staining of PBMC or whole blood with labeled antibodies to CD3, CD4, CD8, CD14, CD16, CD20, CD45RA, CD45RO, CD132, CD56, TCRalphabeta, and TCRgammadelta from BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA and multi-color flow cytometry. Lymphocyte proliferation was assessed by measuring [3H] thymidine incorporation into PBMCs following culture with the stimuli. NoneDonor bone marrow was rigorously depleted of T-cells by soybean lectin agglutination followed by two cycles of rosetting with sheep erythrocytes treated with aminoethylisothiuronium bromide, reducing the number of T-cells by a factor of 10,000. None,None,NoneThis was detected using karyotyping, fluorescence in situ hybridization or short tandem repeats. Statistical comparisons were made using the Mann-Whitney U test for non-parametric analyses and Student's t-test or Chi-square for parametric data. All analyses were performed using Stata 12 (College Park, Tx). Of the 49 patients receiving booster transplants, 31 (63 %) are alive today, a survival rate lower than the 80.3% survival rate in the 122 non-boosted SCIDs (Table 1) and the 75% survival rate for the entire group. The length of survival ranges from 0.33 to 27.6 years from their first transplant (Supplementary Figure 1). The average time for donor T cells to appear in SCID infants after a successful rigorously T cell depleted stem cell transplant is from 90 to 120 days post-transplantation. NoneIf a SCID patient had no or poor T cell function at between 120 and 180 days post-transplantation, particularly if there was a chronic viral infection, he or she was considered for booster transplantation. If there was no T cell function or chimerism, the other parent was used as the donor for the booster transplant. If there was some but inadequate T cell function despite donor T cell chimerism, the donor used for the first transplant was used for the booster. This was significantly correlated with need for a booster transplant. Patients who required booster transplantation were an average of 223 days old at initial transplantation (SD 131), whereas patients who did not require booster transplantation were an average of 165 days at initial transplantation (SD 152). This difference was significant (t=-2.3358, N=171, P=0.0207). The effect of age at the time of the first transplantation on survival of the boosted patients is displayed inSupplementary Figure 2. The average age at initial transplantation for those who are currently alive was 194 days (S.D. 111) and for those who are deceased, the average age at initial transplantation was 273 days (S.D. 148). This difference was found to be significant (t=-2.1117, N=49, P=0.0401). No significant differences in survival were found. Seventy-one percent of non-Hispanic white patients survive, whereas only 50 percent of the 8 Hispanic and 4 black patients survive (X2=5.3566, N=49 P=0.253). The sample sizes were too small to evaluate statistically whether the molecular defect had an effect on mortality (Table 1). Of the 42 patients who received only haploidentical booster transplants, 27 (64%) are still alive. Of the 27 who received a booster only from the same parent, 17 (63%) survive, and of the 14 who received a booster from the other parent, 10 (71%) survive. Only 2 of 5 (40%) patients who received a matched unrelated cord blood transplant are alive, and the patient who received a booster transplant from his grandmother died. The 2 patients who received HLA-identical donor subsequent transplants both survive. The number of nucleated bone marrow cells per kilogram given in the original transplant to the 49 booster transplantation patients was not significantly different from the number of cells given to all other SCID patients transplanted at this institution (z=1.647, N=171, P=0.0996) (Supplementary Table 1). However, the average number of cells per kilogram for the "booster" transplants was significantly lower (z=7.517, N=200, P less than 0.0001), as the patients were older and weighed more (z=-10408, N=200, P less than 0.0001). The mean interval between the first and second transplants in living patients was 1262 days (S.D. 1737, N=31) vs. 326 days for deceased patients (S.D. 323, N=18). The difference between means was significant (t=-2.2534, N=49, P=0.0289). Of all 171 SCID patients transplanted at this institution since 1982, 54 (32%) developed GVHD. Among the entire group, those who had GVHD were not more likely to require a booster transplant. Only 14 (28.6%) of the 49 boosted patients experienced GVHD following their first transplant and only one developed it after a booster transplant The latter patient developed fatal grade IV GVHD after a chemoablated matched unrelated cord blood transplant elsewhere. The boosted patients who had GVHD following their original transplant were no more likely to require more than one booster transplant than those who did not (X2=4.8782, N=49 P=0.181). Eleven of the 18 deceased patients died of one or more clinically apparent viral infections: three of cytomegalovirus, one of EBV lymphoproliferative disease, two of rotavirus, two of adenovirus, two of varicella, two of parainfluenza 3, and one of a herpes simplex infection. One patient died of a fungal infection, one of gram negative sepsis, one of an undefined neurologic disease, two of pulmonary complications, one of hemorrhage following surgery and one of graft-vs-host disease. Other than viral infections,Pneumocystis jirovecipneumonia and oral moniliasis were found to be most common at presentation and resolved with appropriate therapy. All but 4 deceased patients had a clinically documented chronic viral infection, whereas 93.33% of living patients have never had a clinically documented chronic viral infection. This difference was highly significant (X2=24.85, N=47 P less than 0.0000). The 31 living patients' current clinical statuses were evaluated in 6 categories and a score was calculated with 6 being the most unhealthy. Patients were included in this evaluation if they had been seen within the last 2 years or had responded to a recent questionnaire (N=28). NoneThe categories were regular antibiotic use, ADHD, neurological issues, gastrointestinal issues, receiving Cs or lower in school, and being in the 5thpercentile or below in height or weight. The average clinical total score was 1.8 (S.D. 1.6). All infants lacked T-cells prior to initial transplantation. As expected, transplants that resulted in improved immune function were more often found in patients who are now alive. Shown inTable 2are the latest results of immune evaluations in all patients. The absolute numbers of CD3 (z=3.609, p=0.0003) and CD4 (z=4.096, P less than 0.0001) positive T cells were significantly higher in the surviving patients, but the percentage of CD45RA positive T cells was not significantly different when compared to that of the deceased (z=1.535, p=0.1247). Improved T-cell function, measured by lymphocyte proliferation assays, was used to assess immune reconstitution. If a patient had one response greater than 50,000 CPM to any of the mitogens tested, the transplant was considered to have "improved T-cell function." Seventy-five of 130 transplants given to these patients resulted in improved T-cell function; 62 (78%) of these transplants were in patients who are currently living, while only 13 were in patients who are deceased. This difference was found to be highly significant (p less than 0.0000 X2=32.4369, N=129). Mean responses to PHA (cpm) at the latest evaluations were also significantly higher in the living patients (z= 4.210, p less than 0.0001) (Table 2). B-cell function has proven difficult to reconstitute in SCID patients. None,None-NoneTwo patients reported here (#'s 9 and 18,Table 2) were given boosters solely to gain B-cell function, and both failed. Currently, only 9 (29%) of the boosted patients have normal B cell function and do not require IG (Table 2). By contrast, 57 of the 98 (58%) non-boosted SCID patients who survive have B cell function and no longer require IG replacement. NoneIn 7 of the 10 surviving patients who were given a booster transplant only with marrow from the other parent, T-cell function improved remarkably and became normal in 6 of these cases. One CD3 epsilon-deficient SCID patient received her first transplant from her father, but because she showed no immune function at 183 days post-transplantation, she was given a rigorously T-cell-depleted maternal marrow transplant (Figure 1). One month following the administration of the second transplant (maternal marrow), the patient's T-cell proliferation improved to 53,237 CPM to Con A. However, T-cell chimerism studies at the time demonstrated that the proliferating T-cells were 100% of paternal origin. She subsequently demonstrated T-cell chimerism from both parents, but the paternal T-cells dominated. Because her T-cell function was still not normal, a third transplant was given, this time again from her father, and she subsequently developed and maintained normal T-cell function and remains healthy at age 24. She also has normal B-cell function and does not require IVIG. Figure 2shows the post-transplantation course of a boy with IL7Ralpha-Def SCID who received his first haploidentical transplant from his mother. No immune reconstitution was evident at 174 days post-transplantation. A T-cell-depleted haploidentical transplant was then given from his father. His T-cell function subsequently developed normally and has been sustained. Chimerism studies have shown all of his T-cells to be of paternal origin. He has normal B-cell function and does not require IG. He is now healthy at age 23 years. One boy with IL7Ralpha-Def SCID who received his first two transplants from his mother had no immune reconstitution at 408 days post-transplantation (Figure 3). A rigorously T-cell-depleted haploidentical transplant was then given from his father. He subsequently developed normal T-cell function and normal immunoglobulin levels. His T-cell chimerism is paternal. He is now 3.5 years old and healthy. A Jak3-Def SCID also had a remarkable improvement in her T-cell function following a transplant from the other parent, as previously reported. NoneShe had received two paternal transplants without achieving adequate T-cell function or engraftment. Finally, following a third transplant of maternal origin, normal T-cell function was achieved. Chimerism studies have shown that she has 2% paternal cells and 98% maternal T-cells. She also has normal B-cell function and does not require IVIG. She is now 8.5 years old and healthy. Our studies demonstrate that non-ablative booster transplantation is an effective means of enhancing immune system reconstitution following an unsatisfactory initial non-ablative T-cell-depleted HLA-haploidentical bone marrow transplant. The explanation for the higher rate of failure of haploidentical transplants (as opposed to HLA identical transplants) is unknown but appears to be related to the necessity to rigorously T cell deplete. In most cases, booster transplants were effective in improving immune function. No pre-transplant conditioning was used for any of the first or booster haploidentical transplants. Conditioning was used only prior to matched unrelated donor umbilical cord blood transplants. Omitting toxic chemoablative agents prior to bone marrow transplantation in SCID allows the patients to avoid later infertility, veno-occlusive disease and damage to the lungs, endocrine organs, or brain. None-NoneNo increased incidence of GVHD following the first transplant was found when boosted patients were compared to non-boosted patients. In both groups, most of the donors were mismatched haploidentical parents whose marrow was rigorously T-cell depleted. Therefore, there was no need in either group for immunosuppressive drugs to be given for GVHD prophylaxis post-transplantation. As with non-booster transplanted SCID patients, opportunistic viral infections and malnutrition were the main factors associated with mortality in booster-transplanted SCID patients. NoneChronic viral infections were the most lethal complication among booster SCID patients, and in most patients these viral infections were present prior to their original transplant. All but four of 18 deceased patients in this study had clinically documented chronic viral infections and these were the direct cause of death in eleven. Early diagnosis and isolation are key to preventing infection in all SCIDS. None,NoneThe underlying molecular defect had little effect on the need for a booster transplant, with the exception of RAG1 and RAG2-deficiency, where 6 of 7 transplanted SCIDs required booster transplants. In the case of ADA-deficient SCID, often considered problematic for achieving engraftment,Nonethis Center has transplanted 26 such patients over the past 30 years. Twenty (77%) survive and only 6 required booster transplants. Three of the six deceased had been given booster transplants. Two received successful gene therapy,Noneone received an ablated transplant elsewhere, and two are receiving PEG-ADA. The other fifteen are alive and well and are chimeric with related donor T cells after rigorously T cell-depleted non-ablative haploidentical parental (n=10, 2 boosted) or HLA identical (n=5) bone marrow transplants. The use of bone marrow from both parental donors sequentially can improve immune reconstitution in some patients. In some cases, we found that the recipients became double parental chimeras, although usually chimerism with one parent's cells dominated. This is somewhat similar to the situation seen when multiple cord blood units are given to one recipient, in which case chimerism from one particular unit becomes dominant. NoneAlthough the factors that determine dominance of one donor over another have not been clarified, immune-mediated mechanisms are suspected. This was clearly the case in one such patient in our group who failed two paternal T-cell-depleted haploidentical bone marrow transplants but rapidly became immune reconstituted after her mother's T-cell-depleted haploidentical bone marrow transplant. NoneIn that case, we suspected the later-identified transplacentally-transferred maternal T-cells rejected the paternal marrow transplants. Closer HLA matching of one haploidentical parent to the patient as opposed to the other parent's matching was examined, but review of the HLA typing data (not shown) found that in only one of the examples given was there such a possibility. Booster transplantation has proven to be an effective means of prolonging life in SCID patients. Though the survival rate among booster patients (63%) is lower than the overall SCID survival rate at this institution (75%),Nonethis is most likely due to the fact that the patients who received boosters were older at the time of initial transplantation and were sicker, primarily with chronic viral infections. Without receiving a booster transplant, these patients would not have survived. Clinically, most surviving booster transplanted patients are doing well. The majority have adequate T-cell function. As in our previous studies of the entire group, age at transplantation was a key factor in survival,Nonemost likely because the older patients were already infected with viral agents. Recognition of the beneficial effect of very young age on treatment outcome was an important factor in securing approval for newborn screening for SCID. None(3000 words)Kaplan Meier Survival Curve showing the long-term survival of the patients who received booster transplants. Currently, 31 of the 49 patients (63%) are surviving up to 28 years post-transplantation. Kaplan Meier Survival Curve of patients according to their age at time of initial transplantation. The mean age at transplantation of the survivors was 194 days (S.D. 111) and the mean age for those who are deceased was 273 days (S.D. 148). This difference was found to be significant (t =-2.117, N=49, P=0.0401).